<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-5" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>It was still hot in Washington, that September,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hot in the city, hot in the White House rooms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Desiccate heat, dry as a palmleaf fan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That makes hot men tuck cotton handkerchiefs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between their collars and their sweaty necks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Northern girls look limp at half-past-four,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting the first cool breath that will not come</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>For hours yet.</span>
					<span>The sentinel on post</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clicks back and forth, stuffed in his sweltering coat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dreams about brown bottles of cold beer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Deep in a cellar.</span>
					<span>In the crowded Bureaus</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pens move slow, the damp clerks watch the clock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Women in houses take their corsets off</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And stifle in loose gowns.</span>
					<span>They could lie down</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when they touch the bed, the bed feels hot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And there are things to do.</span>
					<span>The men will want</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Hot food when they come back from work.</span>
					<span>They sigh</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And turn, with dragging feet, to the hot kitchens.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sometimes they pause, and push a window up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To feel the blunt, dry buffet of the heat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strike in the face and hear the locust-cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of shrilling newsboy-voices down the street,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“News from the army⁠—extra⁠—ter‑ble battle⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Terr‑r‑ble vic’try⁠—ter‑r‑ble defeat⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lee’s army trapped invading Maryland⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>McClellan⁠—Sharpsburg⁠—fightin’⁠—news from the front⁠—”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The women at the windows sigh and wonder</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I ought to buy a paper⁠—No, I’ll wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till Tom gets home⁠—I wonder if it’s true⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Terrible victory⁠—terrible defeat⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They’re always saying that⁠—when Tom gets home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’ll have some news⁠—I wonder if the army⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, it’s too hot to buy a paper now⁠—”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A hot, spare day of waiting languidly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For contradictory bits of dubious news.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It was a little cooler, three miles out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the tall trees shaded the Soldiers’ Home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lank man, Abraham Lincoln, found it so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glad for it, doubtless, though his cavernous eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had stared all day into a distant fog</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Trying to pierce it.</span>
					<span>“General McClellan</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is now in touch with Lee in front of Sharpsburg</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And will attack as soon as the fog clears.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It’s cleared by now. They must be fighting now.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We can’t expect much from the first reports.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stanton and Halleck think they’re pretty good</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But you can’t tell. Nobody here can tell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>We’re all too far away.</span>
					<span>You get sometimes</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feeling as if you heard the guns yourself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here in the room and felt them shake the house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When you keep waiting for the news all day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>I wish we’d get some news.</span>
					<span>Bull Run was first.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We got the news of Bull Run soon enough.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First that we’d won, hands down, which was a lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And then the truth.</span>
					<span>It may be that today.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I told McClellan not to let them go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Destroy them if he could⁠—but you can’t tell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’s a good man in lots of different ways,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he can’t seem to finish what he starts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then, he’s jealous, like the rest of them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lets Pope get beaten, wanted him to fail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Because he don’t like Pope.</span>
					<span>I put him back</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into command. What else was there to do?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nobody else could lick those troops in shape.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, if he wins, and lets Lee get away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>I’m done with him.</span>
					<span>Bull Run⁠—the Seven Days⁠—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bull Run again⁠—and eighteen months of war⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And still no end to it.</span>
					<span>What is God’s will?</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They come to me and talk about God’s will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In righteous deputations and platoons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Day after day, laymen and ministers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They write me Prayers From Twenty Million Souls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Defining me God’s will and Horace Greeley’s.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God’s will is General This and Senator That,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God’s will is those poor colored fellows’ will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is the will of the Chicago churches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is this man’s and his worst enemy’s.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all of them are sure they know God’s will.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am the only man who does not know it.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And, yet, if it is probable that God</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should, and so very clearly, state His will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To others, on a point of my own duty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It might be thought He would reveal it me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Directly, more especially as I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So earnestly desire to know His will.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The will of God prevails. No doubt, no doubt⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, in great contests, each side claims to act</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In strict accordance with the will of God.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Both may, one must be wrong.</span>
					<span>God could have saved</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Union or destroyed it without war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If He so wished. And yet this war began,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, once begun, goes on, though He could give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Victory, at any time, to either side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is unfathomable. Yet I know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This, and this only. While I live and breathe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I mean to save the Union if I can,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by whatever means my hands can find</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Under the Constitution.</span>
					<span>If God reads</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hearts of men as clearly as He must</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be Himself, then He can read in mine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And has, for twenty years, the old, scarred wish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the last slave should be forever free</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Here, in this country.</span>
					<span>I do not go back</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>From that scarred wish and have not.</span>
					<span>But I put</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Union, first and last, before the slave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If freeing slaves will bring the Union back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then I will free them; if by freeing some</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leaving some enslaved I help my cause,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will do that⁠—but should such freedom mean</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wreckage of the Union that I serve</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>I would not free a slave.</span>
					<span>O Will of God,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am a patient man, and I can wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like an old gunflint buried in the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the slow years pile up like moldering leaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above me, underneath the rake of Time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And turn, in time, to the dark, fruitful mold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That smells of Sangamon apples, till at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s no sleep left there, and the steel event</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Descends to strike the live coal out of me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And light the powder that was always there.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That is my only virtue as I see it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ability to wait and hold my own</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And keep my own resolves once they are made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In spite of what the smarter people say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can’t be smart the way that they are smart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ve known that since I was an ugly child.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It teaches you⁠—to be an ugly child.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It teaches you⁠—to lose a thing you love.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It sticks your roots down into Sangamon ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And makes you grow when you don’t want to grow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And makes you tough enough to wait life out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wait like the fields, under the rain and snow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I have not thought for years of that lost grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That was my first hard lesson in the queer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thing between men and women we call love.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when I think of it, and when I hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rain and snow fall on it, as they must,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It fills me with unutterable grief.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We’ve come a good long way, my hat and I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since then, a pretty lengthy piece of road,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uphill and down but mostly with a pack.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Years of law-business, years of cracking jokes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And watching Billy Herndon do his best</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make me out, which seemed to be a job;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Years trying how to learn to handle men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which can be done, if you’ve got heart enough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how to deal with women or a woman</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that’s about the hardest task I know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, when you get a man, you’ve got the man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a good big axehandle in your fist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But you can’t catch a woman like an axe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She’ll run like mercury between your hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leave you wondering which road she went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The minute when you thought you knew her ways.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I understand the uses of the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I have burned my hands at certain fires</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often enough to know a use for fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when the genius of the water moves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that’s the woman’s genius, I’m at sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In every sense and meaning of the word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With nothing but old patience for my chart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And patience doesn’t always please a woman.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bright streams of water, watering the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep seas of water that all men must sail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or rest half-men and fill the narrow graves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When will I understand or comprehend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your salt, sweet taste, so different from the taste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Sangamon russets, weighing down the bough?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You can live with the water twenty years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never understand it like the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that’s the lesson I can’t seem to learn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Abraham Lincoln, his hand and pen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He will be good, but God knows when.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He will be wise, but God knows when.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It doesn’t matter. If I had some news⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>News from that fog⁠—</span>
					<span>I’ll get the hypo, sure,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unless I watch myself, waiting for news.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can’t afford to get the hypo now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>I’ve got too much to do.</span>
					<span>Political years,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Housekeeping years of marrying and begetting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And losing, too, the children and the town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wife, the house, the life, the joy and grief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The profound wonder still behind it all.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I had a friend who married and was happy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But something haunted him that haunted me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before he did, till he could hardly tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What his own mind was, for the brooding veil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And immaterial horror of the soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which colors the whole world for men like that.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I do not know from whence that horror comes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or why it hangs between us and the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For some few men, at certain times and days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I have known it closer than my flesh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Got up with it, lain down and walked with it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scotched it awhile, but never killed it quite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And yet lived on.</span>
					<span>I wrote him good advice,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The way you do, and told him this, for part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Again you fear that that Elysium</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of which you’ve dreamed so much is not to be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well, I dare swear it will not be the fault</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that same black-eyed Fanny, now your wife.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I have now no doubt that you and I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To our particular misfortune, dream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dreams of Elysium far exceeding all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That any earthly thing can realize.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I wrote that more than twenty years ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At thirty-three, and now I’m fifty-three,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the slow days have brought me up at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through water, earth and fire, to where I stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To where I stand⁠—and no Elysiums still.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No, no Elysiums⁠—for that personal dream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I dreamt of for myself and in my youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has been abolished by the falling sledge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of chance and an ambition so fulfilled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the fulfillment killed its personal part.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>My old ambition was an iron ring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loose-hooped around the live trunk of a tree.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the tree grows till bark and iron touch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then stops growing, ring and tree are matched</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And the fulfillment fits.</span>
					<span>But, if by some</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unlikely chance, the growing still keeps on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tree must burst the binding-ring or die.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I have not once controlled the circumstances.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They have controlled me. But with that control</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They made me grow or die. And I have grown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The iron ring is burst.</span>
					<span>Three elements,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth, water and fire. I have passed through them all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still to find no Elysium for my hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still to find no Elysium but growth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the slow will to grow to match my task.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Three elements. I have not sought the fourth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deeply, till now⁠—the element of air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The everlasting element of God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who must be there in spite of all we see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who must be there in spite of all we bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who must exist where all Elysiums</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are less than shadows of a hunter’s fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lighted at night to scare a wolf away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I know that wolf⁠—his scars are in my hide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And no Elysiums can rub them out.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore at last, I lift my hands to You</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who Were and Are and Must Be, if our world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is anything but a lost ironclad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shipped with a crew of fools and mutineers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To drift between the cold forts of the stars.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I’ve never found a church that I could join</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although I’ve prayed in churches in my time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And listened to all sorts of ministers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well, they were good men, most of them, and yet⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thing behind the words⁠—it’s hard to find.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I used to think it wasn’t there at all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Couldn’t be there. I cannot say that, now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now I pray to You and You alone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Teach me to know Your will. Teach me to read</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your difficult purpose here, which must be plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I had eyes to see it. Make me just.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There was a man I knew near Pigeon Creek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who kept a kennel full of hunting dogs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young dogs and old, smart hounds and silly hounds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’d sell the young ones every now and then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smart as they were and slick as they could run.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the one dog he’d never sell or lend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was an old half-deaf foolish-looking hound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You wouldn’t think had sense to scratch a flea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unless the flea were old and sickly too.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most days he used to lie beside the stove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or sleeping in a piece of sun outside.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Folks used to plague the man about that dog</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he’d agree to everything they said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“No⁠—he ain’t much on looks⁠—or much on speed⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A young dog can outrun him any time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outlook him and outeat him and outleap him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, Mister, that dog’s hell on a cold scent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, once he gets his teeth in what he’s after,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He don’t let go until he knows he’s dead.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I am that old, deaf hunting-dog, O Lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the world’s kennel holds ten thousand hounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smarter and faster and with finer coats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hunt your hidden purpose up the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bell upon the trace you leave behind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, when even they fail and lose the scent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will keep on because I must keep on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until You utterly reveal Yourself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sink my teeth in justice soon or late.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is no more to ask of earth or fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And water only runs between my hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in the air, I’ll look, in the blue air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old dog, muzzle down to the cold scent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Day after day, until the tired years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crackle beneath his feet like broken sticks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the last barren bush consumes with peace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I should have tried the course with younger legs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This hunting-ground is stiff enough to pull</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The metal heart out of a dog of steel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I should have started back at Pigeon Creek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From scratch, not forty years behind the mark.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But you can’t change yourself, and, if you could,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You might fetch the wrong jack-knife in the swap.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s up to you to whittle what you can</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With what you’ve got⁠—and what I am, I am</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For what it’s worth, hypo and legs and all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can’t complain. I’m ready to admit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You could have made a better-looking dog</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the same raw material, no doubt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, since You didn’t, this’ll have to do.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Therefore I utterly lift up my hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To You, and here and now beseech Your aid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have held back when others tugged me on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have gone on when others pulled me back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Striving to read Your will, striving to find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The justice and expedience of this case,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hunting an arrow down the chilly airs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until my eyes are blind with the great wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my heart sick with running after peace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now, I stand and tremble on the last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Edge of the last blue cliff, a hound beat out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tail down and belly flattened to the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My lungs are breathless and my legs are whipped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Everything in me’s whipped except my will.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can’t go on. And yet, I must go on.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I will say this. Two months ago I read</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My proclamation setting these men free</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Seward and the rest. I told them then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I was not calling on them for advice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But to hear something that I meant to do.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We talked about it. Most of them approved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thing, if not the time. Then Seward said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something I hadn’t thought of, “I approve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The proclamation⁠—but, if issued now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With our defeats in everybody’s mouth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It may be viewed as a last shriek for help</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From an exhausted, beaten government.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put it aside until a victory comes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Then issue it with victory.”</span>
					<span>He was right,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I put the thing aside⁠—and ever since</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There has been nothing for us but defeat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up to this battle now⁠—and still no news.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If I had eyes to look to Maryland!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I could move that battle with my hands!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, it don’t work. I’m not a general.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All I can do is trust the men who are.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I’m not a general, but I promise this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here at the end of every ounce of strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I can muster, here in the dark pit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ignorance that is not quite despair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And doubt that does but must not break the mind!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pit I have inhabited so long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At various times and seasons, that my soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has taken color in its very grains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the blind darkness, from the lonely cave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That never hears a footstep but my own</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor ever will, while I’m a man alive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To keep my prison locked from visitors.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What if I heard another footstep there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What if, some day⁠—there is no one but God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No one but God who could descend that stair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ring his heavy footfalls on the stone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if He came, what would we say to Him?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That prison is ourselves that we have built,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, being so, its loneliness is just,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, being so, its loneliness endures.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But, if another came,</span>
					<span>What would we say?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What can the blind say, given back their eyes?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No, it must be as it has always been.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We are all prisoners in that degree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And will remain so, but I think I know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>This⁠—God is not a jailor.⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<span>And I make</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A promise now to You and to myself.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If this last battle is a victory</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they can drive the Rebel army back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Maryland, back over the Potomac,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My proclamation shall go out at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To set those other prisoners and slaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From this next year, then and forever free.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So much for my will. Show me what is Yours!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That must be news, those footsteps in the hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good news, or else they wouldn’t come so fast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What is it, now? Yes, yes, I’m glad of that.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’m very glad. There’s no mistake this time?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We have the best of them? They’re in retreat?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>This is a great day, Stanton⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<span>… If McClellan</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can only follow up the victory now!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lord, I will keep my promise and go on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your will, in much, still being dark to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, in this one thing, as I see it, plain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And yet⁠—if Lee slips from our hands again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he well may from all those last reports</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the war still goes on⁠—and still no end⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even after this Antietam⁠—not for years⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I cannot read it but I will go on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old dog, old dog, but settled to the scent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with fresh breath now from this breathing space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Almighty God.</span>
					<span>At best we never seem</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To know You wholly, but there’s something left,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>A strange, last courage.</span>
					<span>We can fail and fail,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, deep against the failure, something wars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something goes forward, something lights a match,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something gets up from Sangamon County ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Armed with a bitten and a blunted axe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after twenty thousand wasted strokes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brings the tall hemlock crashing to the ground.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Spade saw the yellow river rolling ahead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sore, cracked lips curled back in a death’s head grin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his empty belly ceased to stick to his sides.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sat on the bank a minute to rest his legs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And catch his breath. He had lived for the last three days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a yam, two ears of horse-corn and the lame rabbit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That couldn’t run away when he threw the stick.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He was still a big man but the ribs stuck into his skin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the hard, dry muscles were wasted to leather thongs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Boy, I wisht we had a good meal,” he thought with a dull</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fatigue. “Dat’s Freedom’s lan’ ovah dere fer sho’,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But how we gwine to swim it without a good meal?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wisht we had even a spoonful of good hot pot-licker</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Or a smidgin’ of barbecued shote.</span>
					<span>Dat river’s cold.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Colder’n Jordan. I wisht we had a good meal.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He went down to the river and tested it with his hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cold jumped up his arm and into his heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sharp as the toothache. His mouth wried up in a queer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grimace. He felt like crying. “I’se tired,” he said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“Flow easy, river,” he said.</span>
					<span>Then he tumbled in.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hard shock of the plunge took his breath away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So stinging at first that his arms and legs moved fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But then the cold crept into his creaking bones</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And he rolled wild eyes.</span>
					<span>“Oh, God,” he thought as he struggled,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I’se weak as a cat. I ust to be a strong man.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The yellow flood sucked round him, pulling him down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The yellow foam had a taste like death in his mouth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“We ought to of had a good meal,” he thought with a weak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wonder, as he fought weakly. “A good hot meal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dis current, she’s too strong for a hungry mouth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’se done our best, but she fights like a angel would</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Like wrestlin’ with a death-angel.”</span>
					<span>He choked and sank</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To come up gasping and staring with bloodshot eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brain had a last, clear flash. “You’re drowned,” said the brain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Then it stopped working.</span>
					<span>But the black, thrashing hands</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caught hold of something solid and hard and rough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hung to it with a last exhausted grip.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—He had been fighting an angel for seven nights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now he hung by his hands to the angel’s neck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lost in an iron darkness of beating wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If he once let go, the angel would push him off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And touch him across the loins with a stony hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>In the last death-trick of the wrestle.</span>
					<span>He moaned a little.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The blackness began to lighten. He saw the river</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolling and rolling. He was clutched to a log</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a treetoad set afloat on a chip of wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the log and he were rushing downstream together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the current pulled them both toward the freedom side.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He hunched up a little higher. An eddy took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The log and him and spun them both like a top</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>While he prayed and sickened.</span>
					<span>Then they were out of the eddy</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drifting along more slowly, straight for the shore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He hauled himself up the bank with enormous care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Vomited and lay down.</span>
					<span>When he could arise</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He looked at his hands. They were still hooked into a curve.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It took quite a time to straighten them back again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He said a prayer as he tried to dry his clothes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then he looked for a stone and threw it into the river.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“You’se a mean and hungry river,” he said. “You is.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heah’s a present for you. I hope it busts up your teef.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Heah’s a present fum Mistah Spade.”</span>
					<span>He felt better then,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But his belly started to ache. “Act patient,” he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rubbing it gently, “We’se loose in Freedom’s land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crossed old Jordan⁠—bound to get vittles now.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He started out for the town. The town wasn’t far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he had to go slow. Sometimes he fell on the way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last time he fell was in front of a little yard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a white, well-painted fence. A woman came out.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Get along,” she said. “You can’t get sick around here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’m tired of you nigger tramps. You’re all of you thieves.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spade rose and said something vague about swimming rivers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And vittles. She stamped her foot. “Get along!” she said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“Get along or I’ll call the dog and⁠—”</span>
					<span>Spade got along.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The next house, the dog was barking out in the yard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He went by as fast as he could, but when he looked back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man had come out with a hostile stick in his hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spade shook his head. “Freedom’s land,” he thought to himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“They’s some mighty quick-actin’ people in Freedom’s land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Some mighty rash-tempered dogs.”</span>
					<span>He swayed as he walked.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here was another house. He looked for the dog</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fright in his eyes. Then a swimming qualm came over him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A deathly faintness. His hands went out to the fence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gripped two palings, hung, and stared at his shoes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somebody was talking to him. He tried to move on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But his legs wouldn’t walk. The voice was a woman’s voice.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She’d be calling the dog in a minute. He shivered hard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Excuse me ma’am, but I’se feelin’ poorly,” he said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I just crossed over⁠—I’ll go as soon as I kin.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man’s voice now. They were taking him under the arms.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He didn’t care what they did. He let himself walk.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then he was sitting up in a bentwood chair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a tidy kitchen that smelt of frying and ham;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thick, good smell made him strangely sick at first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it soon passed off. They fed him little by little</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till at last he could tell his tale and ask about them.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They were churchgoing people and kind to runaway slaves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She wore a blue dress. They had two sons in the war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That was all that he knew and all that he ever knew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they let him sleep in the garret and gave him some shoes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And fifty cents when he left.</span>
					<span>He wanted to stay</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But times were bad and they couldn’t afford to keep him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The town was tired of runaway negroes now.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All the same, when he left, he walked with a different step.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He went down town. He was free. He was Mister Spade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The President had written a letter about it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the mule and the coal-black gal might come any day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He hummed a tuneless whistle between his teeth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fished a piece of paper out of his pants,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They’d written him down a boss’s name and address</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he’d have to get somebody to read it again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He approached a group of three white men on a corner</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Holding the paper.</span>
					<span>“ ’Scuse me, boss, can you tell me⁠—”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The white men looked at him with hard, vacant eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last one of them took the paper. “Oh, Hell,” he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spitting, and gave Spade a stare. Then he seemed to think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of something funny. He nudged the other two men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Listen, nigger,” he said. “You want <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Braid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’ll find him two blocks down at the Marshal’s office,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell him <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Clarke sent you there⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> William Clarke⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He’ll fix you up all right.”</span>
					<span>The other men grinned,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adding directions. Spade thanked them and went away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He heard them laugh as he went.</span>
					<span>Another man took him</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To a red-faced person who sat in a tilted chair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reading a paper, his feet cocked up on his desk.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He looked at Spade and his feet came down with a slam.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Take that God damn smile off,” he said. “Who let you come in?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You contraband niggers think that you own this town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that all you’ve got to do is cross over here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For people to feed you free the rest of your lives.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well it don’t go down with me⁠—just understand that.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Spade brought out his paper, dumbly. The man looked at it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“Hell, this ain’t for me,” he said.</span>
					<span>Spade started to go.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Come back here, nigger,” ordered the red-faced man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hey, Mike!” he yelled “Here’s another of Lincoln’s pets.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Send him out with the rest of the gang.”</span>
					<span>“But, boss⁠—” said Spade.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Don’t get lippy with me,” said the man, “Mike, take him along.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pimply boy named Mike jerked a sallow thumb.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Come on, black beauty,” he said. “We got you a job.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Spade followed him, dazed.</span>
					<span>When they were out in the street</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The boy turned to him. “Now, nigger, watch out,” he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patting a heavy pistol swung at his belt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With puppy-fierceness, “You don’t get away from me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>I’m a special deputy, see?”</span>
					<span>“All right, boss,” said Spade.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I ain’t aimin’ to get away from nobody now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I just aims to work till I gets myself a good mule.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The boy laughed briefly. The conversation dropped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They walked out of the town till they came to a torn-up road</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Where a gang of negroes was working.</span>
					<span>“Say, boss⁠—” said Spade.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The boy cut him off. “Hey, Jerry,” he called to the foreman,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“Here’s another one.”</span>
					<span>The foreman looked up and spat.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Judas!” he said, “Can’t they keep the bastards at home?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’d put a gun on that river if I was Braid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well, come along, nig, get a move on and find a shovel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Don’t stand lookin’ at me all day.”</span>
					<span>The boy went away.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spade found a shovel and started work on the road.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The foreman watched him awhile with sarcastic eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Spade saw that he, too, wore a pistol.</span>
					<span>“Christ,” said the foreman,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disgustedly, “Try and put some guts in it there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’re big enough. That shovel’ll cost five dollars.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remember that⁠—it comes out of your first week’s pay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>You’re a free nigger now.”</span>
					<span>He chuckled. Spade didn’t answer</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, after a while, the foreman moved away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Spade turned to the gingerskinned negro who worked beside him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“You fum de Souf?” he mouthed at him.</span>
					<span>Ginger nodded.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I been here a month now. They fotched me here the first day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Got any money?”</span>
					<span>“Nuthin’ but fifty cents.”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“You better give it to him,” said Ginger, stealing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A glance at the foreman. “He’ll treat you bad if you don’t.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“He’s a cranky man.”</span>
					<span>Spade’s heart sank into his boots.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Don’t we uns get paid? We ain’t none of us slaves no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The President said so. Why we wuhkin’ like dis?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ginger snickered. “Sho’ we uns gets paid,” he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“But we got to buy our stuff at de company sto’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he sells his old shovels a dozen times what dey’s wuth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I only been here a month but I owes twelve dollars.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dey ain’t no way to pay it except by wuhk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And de more you wuhk de more you owe at the sto’.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I kain’t figure it out exactly but it’s dat way.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spade worked for a while, revolving these things in his mind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I reckoned I sho’ was gwine to be sassy and free</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>When I swum dat river,” he said.</span>
					<span>Ginger grinned like a monkey,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Swing your shubbel, boy, and forget what you ain’t.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You mought be out on de chain-gang, bustin’ up rocks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Or agin, you mought be enlisted.”</span>
					<span>“Huh?” said Spade.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sho’, dey’s gwine to enlist us all when we finish dis road.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All excep’ me. I got bad sight in my eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And dey knows about it.”</span>
					<span>“Dey kain’t enlist me,” said Spade.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I ain’t honin’ to go an’ fight in no white-folks war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I ain’t bust loose into Freedom’s land fer dat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All I want is a chance to git me a gal and a mule.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I’se free, how kin dey enlist me, lessen I want?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You watch ’em,” said Ginger. They worked on for a time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The foreman stood on the bank and watched them work,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Now and then he drank from a bottle.</span>
					<span>Spade felt hungry.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span class="i7">Autumn is filling his harvest-bins</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">With red and yellow grain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">Fire begins and frost begins</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">And the floors are cold again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i7">Summer went when the crop was sold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">Summer is piled away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">Dry as a faded marigold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">In the dry, long-gathered hay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i7">It is time to walk to the cider-mill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">Through air like apple wine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">And watch the moon rise over the hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">Stinging and hard and fine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i7">It is time to cover your seed-pods deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">And let them wait and be warm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">It is time to sleep the heavy sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">That does not wake for the storm.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i7">Winter walks from the green, streaked West</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">With a bag of Northern Spies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">The skins are red as a robin’s breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">The honey chill as the skies.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Melora Vilas walked in the woods that autumn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heard the dry leaves crackle under her feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feeling, below the leaves, the blunt heavy earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“It’s getting-in time,” she thought. “It’s getting-in time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Time to put things in barns and sit by the stove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Time to watch the long snow and remember your lover.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He isn’t dead. I know that he isn’t dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maybe they’ve changed his body into a tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maybe they’ve changed his body into a cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Or something that sleeps through the Winter.</span>
					<span>But I’ll remember.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll sleep through the Winter, too. We all sleep then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the Spring freshet drums in the narrow brooks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fills them with a fresh water, they’ll let him come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the cloud and the tree and the Winter-sleep.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Winter falls and we lie like beleaguered stones</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>In the black, cramped ground.</span>
					<span>And then you wake in the morning</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the air’s got soft and you plant the narrow-edged seeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They grow all Summer and now we’ve put them in barns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sleep again for a while.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I am the seed and the husk. I have sown and reaped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart is a barn full of grain that my work has harvested.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My body holds the ripe grain. I can wait my time.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She walked on farther and came to the lip of the spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brown leaves drifted the water. She watched them drift.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I am satisfied,” she thought, “I am satisfied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can wait my time in spite of Mom being sad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Pop looking fierce and sad when he sees me walk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So heavy and knows I’ll have to walk heavier still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before my time comes. I’m sorry to make them sad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’m sorry I did a bad thing if it was a bad thing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But I’m satisfied.</span>
					<span>We cut the heart on the tree.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ve got my half of the dime and he’s got his,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’ll come back when Winter’s over or else I’ll find him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When you can push up the windows, when the new colts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come out in the Spring, when the snake sheds his winter coat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the old, shed coat of Winter lies on the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grey as wasp-paper under the green, slow rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the big barn door rolls open.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I was worried to death at first and I couldn’t tell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But as soon as I knew what it was⁠—it was different then⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>It made things all right.</span>
					<span>I can’t tell why it did that.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She awkwardly stooped and put her hand on the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the brittle leaves the soil was alive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Torn with its harvest, turned on its side toward sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But stripped for battle, too, for the unending</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Battle with Winters till the Spring is born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a tight green leaf uncurling, so slightly, so gently,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the husk of ice and the blank, white snows.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The wind moved over it, blowing the leaves away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaving the bare, indomitable breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She felt a wind move over her heavy body,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Stripping it clean for war.</span>
					<span>She felt the blind-featured</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mystery move, the harmonics of the quick grain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The battle and the awakening for battle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the salt taste of peace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A flight of geese passed by in a narrow <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Honking their cry.</span>
					<span>That cry was stuck in her heart</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Like a bright knife.</span>
					<span>She could have laughed or wept</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because of that cry flung down from a moving wing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But she stood silent.</span>
					<span>She had touched the life in the ground.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span class="i5">Love came by from the riversmoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">When the leaves were fresh on the tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">But I cut my heart on the blackjack oak</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">Before they fell on me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i5">The leaves are green in the early Spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">They are brown as linsey now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">I did not ask for a wedding-ring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">From the wind in the bending bough.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i5">Fall lightly, lightly, leaves of the wild,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">Fall lightly on my care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">I am not the first to go with child</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">Because of the blowing air.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i5">I am not the first nor yet the last</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">To watch a goosefeather sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">And wonder what will come of the blast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">And the name to call it by.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i5">Snow down, snow down, you whitefeather bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">Snow down, you winter storm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Where the good girls sleep with a gospel word</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">To keep their honor warm.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i5">The good girls sleep in their modesty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">The bad girls sleep in their shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">But I must sleep in the hollow tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">Till my child can have a name.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i5">I will not ask for the wheel and thread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">To spin the labor plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Or the scissors hidden under the bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">To cut the bearing-pain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i5">I will not ask for the prayer in church</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">Or the preacher saying the prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">But I will ask the shivering birch</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">To hold its arms in the air.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i5">Cold and cold and cold again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">Cold in the blackjack limb</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The winds of the sky for his sponsor-men</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">And a bird to christen him.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i5">Now listen to me, you Tennessee corn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">And listen to my word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">This is the first child ever born</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">That was christened by a bird.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i5">He’s going to act like a hound let loose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">When he comes from the blackjack tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">And he’s going to walk in proud shoes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">All over Tennessee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i5">I’ll feed him milk out of my own breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">And call him Whistling Jack.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">And his dad’ll bring him a partridge nest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">As soon as his dad comes back.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>John Brown’s raid has gone forward, the definite thing is done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not as we see it done when we read the books,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A clear light burning suddenly in the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But dimly, obscurely, a flame half-strangled by smoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thing come to pass from a victory not a victory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dubious doctrine dubiously received.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The papers praise, but the recruiting is slow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bonds sell badly, the grind of the war goes on⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is no sudden casting off of a chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only a slow thought working its way through the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A slow root growing, touching a hundred soils,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thousand minds⁠—no blossom or flower yet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It takes a long time to bring a thought into act</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when it blossoms at last, the gardeners wonder⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There have been so many to labor this patch of ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Garrison, Beecher, a dozen New England names,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Courageous, insulting Sumner, narrow and strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his tongue of silver and venom and his wrecked body,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wendell Phillips, Antinous of Harvard⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now that the thought has arisen, they are not sure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was their thought after all⁠—it is good enough⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The best one could expect from a man like Lincoln,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But this and that are wrong, are unshrewdly planned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We could have ordered it better, we knew the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It should have been done before, in a different way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And our praise is grudging.</span>
					<span>Pity the gardeners,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pity Boston, pity the pure in heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pity the men whom Time goes past in the night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without their knowledge. They worked through the heat of the day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Let us even pity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wendell Phillips, Antinous of Harvard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he was a model man and such men deserve</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>A definite pity at times.</span>
					<span>He too did his best.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Secure in his own impenetrable self-knowledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He seldom agreed with Lincoln or thought him wise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sometimes thought that a stunning defeat would give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A needed lesson to the soul of the nation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, before, would have broken the Union as blithely as Yancey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For his own side of abolition, speaking about it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In many public meetings where he was heckled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But usually silenced the hecklers sooner or later</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his mellifluous, masculine, well-trained accents.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>War could hardly come too soon for a man like that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when it came, he was busy. He did his part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being strong and active, blessed with a ready mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the cause being one to which he professed devotion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spoke. He spoke well, with conviction, and frequently.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So much for the banner-bearers of abolition,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men who carried the lonely flag for years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And could bear defeat with the strength of the pure in heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But could not understand the face of success.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The other dissenters are simpler to understand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are ready to fight for the Union but not for niggers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They don’t give a damn for niggers and say so now</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>With a grievous cry.</span>
					<span>And yet the slow root-thought works</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Gradually through men’s minds.</span>
					<span>The Lancashire spinners,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrown out of work because no cotton can come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To feed their mills through the choking Union blockade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet hold starvation meetings and praise the Union.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tide has begun to turn in some English minds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The watchers overseas feel their hands grow numb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slidell and Mason and Huse still burrow and argue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But a cold breath blows through the rooms with the chandeliers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>A door is beginning to close.</span>
					<span>Few men perceive</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The turn of the tide, the closing of the door.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lincoln does not perceive it. He sees alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grind of the war, the lagging of the recruits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Election after election going against him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Lee back safe in Virginia after Antietam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While McClellan sticks for five weeks and will not move.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He loses patience at last and removes McClellan.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Burnside succeeds him⁠—</span>
					<span>and the grimly bewildered</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Army of the Potomac has a new rider,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Affable, portly, whiskered and self-distrusting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who did not wish the command and tried to decline it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took it at last and almost wept when he did.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A worried man who passes like a sad ghost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across November, looking for confidence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beats his army at last against stone walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Fredericksburg in the expected defeat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>With frightful slaughter.</span>
					<span>The news of the thing comes back.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are tears in his eyes. He never wanted command.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Those men over there,” he groans, “Those men over there”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—They are piled like cordwood in front of the stone wall⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He wants to lead a last desperate charge himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But he is restrained.</span>
					<span>The sullen army draws back,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Licking its wounds. The night falls. The newspapers rave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are sixty-three hundred dead in that doomed attack</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>That never should have been made.</span>
					<span>His shoulders are bowed.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He tries a vain march in the mud and resigns at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The weapon he could not wield.</span>
					<span>Joe Hooker succeeds him.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The winter clamps down, cold winter of doubt and grief.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span class="i7">The sun shines, the wind goes by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">The prisoners and captives lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">In a cell without an eye.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i7">Winter will not touch them more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">Than the cold upon a sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">That was frozen long before.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i7">Summer will not make them sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">Nor the rainy Springs refresh</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">That extremity of heat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">In the self-corrupting flesh.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i7">The band blares, the bugles snort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">They lose the fort or take the fort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">Someone writes a wise report.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i7">Someone’s name is Victory.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">The prisoners and captives lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">Too long dead before they die.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>For all prisoners and captives now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the dark legion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Andersonvillers, the Castle Thunder men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men who froze at Camp Morton and came from the dungeons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With blood burst out on their faces.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men who died at Salisbury and Belle Isle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Elmira, <abbr>St.</abbr> Louis, Camp Douglas⁠—the Libby tunnellers⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men in the fetid air.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There are charges back and forth upon either side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Some true, some false.</span>
					<span>You can read the official reports,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dozen thick black-bound volumes of oaths and statements,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A desert of type, a dozen black mummy-cases</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Embalming the long-forgotten, building again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cumbrous machine of guards and reports and orders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Respectfully submitted”⁠ ⁠… “I beg to state”⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“State of kitchen⁠—good.”⁠ ⁠… “Food, quality of⁠—quite good.”⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Police of hospital⁠—good except Ward 7”⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Remarks⁠—we have ninety-five cases of smallpox now.”⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Remarks⁠—as to general health of prisoners, fair.”⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Remarks”⁠ ⁠… “Remarks”⁠ ⁠… “Respectfully submitted”⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under this type are men who used to have hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the croaking wheels have respectfully submitted them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a void, embalmed them in mummy-cases,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With their chills and fever, their looks and plans of escape.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They called one “Shorty,” they called another “The Judge,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One man wore the Virgin’s medal around his neck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One had a broken nose and one was a liar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“Respectfully submitted⁠—”</span>
					<span>But, now and then,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man or a scene escapes from the mummy-cases,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like smoke escaping, blue smoke coiling into pictures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Stare at those coils⁠—</span>
					<span>and see in the hardened smoke,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The triple stockade of Andersonville the damned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where men corrupted like flies in their own dung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the gangrened sick were black with smoke and their filth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There were thirty thousand Federal soldiers there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Before the end of the war.</span>
					<span>A man called Wirtz,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Swiss, half brute, half fool, and wholly a clod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Commanded that camp of spectres.</span>
					<span>One reads what he did</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And longs to hang him higher than Haman hung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then one reads what he said when he was tried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the war⁠—and sees the long, heavy face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dull fly buzzing stupidly in the trap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ignorant lead of the voice, saying and saying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why, I did what I could, I was ordered to keep the jail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yes, I set up deadlines, sometimes chased men with dogs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put men in torturing stocks, killed this one and that,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the camp corrupt till it tainted the very guards</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who came there with mortal sickness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they were prisoners, they were dangerous men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If a hundred died a day⁠—how was it my fault?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I did my duty. I always reported the deaths.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I don’t see what I did different from other people.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I fought well at Seven Pines and was badly wounded.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have witnesses here to tell you I’m a good man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that I was really kind. I don’t understand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’m old. I’m sick. You’re going to hang me. Why?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Crush out the fly with your thumb and wipe your hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You cannot crush the leaden, creaking machine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The first endorsement, the paper on the desk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Referred by Adjutant Feeble to Captain Dull</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For further information and his report.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Some men wish evil and accomplish it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But most men, when they work in that machine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just let it happen somewhere in the wheels.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fault is no decisive, villainous knife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the dull saw that is the routine mind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Why, if a man lay dying on their desk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They’d do their best to help him, friend or foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But this is merely a respectfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Submitted paper, properly endorsed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be sent on and on, and gather blood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Stare at the smoke again for a moment’s space</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And see another live man in another prison.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A colored trooper named Woodson was on guard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the prison at Newport News, one night around nine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was a gallery there, where the privy was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But prisoners weren’t allowed in it after dark.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The colored soldier talked with the prisoners</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At first, in a casual, more or less friendly way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They tried to sell him breastpins and rings they had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bothered him by wanting to go to the privy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At last, he fired on a man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who went in the gallery, but happened to miss him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lieutenant came down to ask the cause of the shot.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Woodson told him.</span>
					<span>A second prisoner went</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the same errand, a shadow slipping through shadows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woodson halted him twice but he kept on moving.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“There’s a man in the gallery now,” said the young lieutenant.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Well, I reckon it’s one of the men makin’ water again,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said Woodson, uneasily. The lieutenant stiffened.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was officer of the guard and orders were orders.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why don’t you use the bayonet on him?” he said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woodson jumped forward. The bayonet hunched and struck.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The man ran into the privy and fell like a log.⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A prisoner said “You’ve killed him dead,” in a voice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Yes, by God!” said Woodson, cleaning his bayonet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“They buried us alive at Fort Pillow.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i19">The court</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found the sentry a trifle hasty, but on the whole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within his instructions, the officer’s orders lawful;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>One cannot dispute the court.</span>
					<span>And yet the man</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who went to the privy is inconveniently dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seems an excessive judgment for going there.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The little pictures wreathe into smoke again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mummy-cases close upon the dark legion.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The papers are filed away.</span>
					<span>If they once were sent</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To another court for some last word of review,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are back again. It seems strange that such tidy files</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of correspondence respectfully submitted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should be returned from God with no final endorsement.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>The slow carts hitched along toward the place of exchange</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Through a bleak wind.</span>
					<span>It was not a long wagon train,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wagons and horses were too important to waste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On prisoners for exchange, if the men could march.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many did march and some few died on the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But more died up in the wagons, which was not odd.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If a man was too sick to walk, he was pretty sick.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>They had been two days on the road.</span>
					<span>Jack Ellyat lay</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between a perishing giant from Illinois</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who raved that he was bailing a leaky boat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out on the Lakes, and a slight, tubercular Jew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who muttered like a sick duck when the wagon jounced.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bailey marched. He still was able to march</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But his skin hung on him. He hummed to the Weaver’s tune.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>They got to the river at last.</span>
					<span>Jack Ellyat saw</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A yellow stream and slow boats crossing the stream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bailey had helped him out. He was walking now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his arm around Bailey’s neck. Their course was a crab’s.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Jew was up and staring with shoe-button eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While his cough took him. The giant lay on a plank,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Some men were trying to lift him.</span>
					<span>The wind blew</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over a knife of frost and shook their rags.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The air was a thawing ice of most pure, clear gold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They stared across the river and saw the flag</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the tall, blue soldiers walking in thick, warm coats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like strong, big men who fed well. And then they cheered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dry thin cheer, pumped up from exhausted lungs</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And yet with a metal vibrance.</span>
					<span>The bright flag flapped.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I can smell ’em frying meat,” said the coughing Jew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sniffed, “Oh God, I hope it ain’t ham,” he said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his mouth puckered. A number of scarecrows laughed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then they heard the echo of their own cheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flung back at them, it seemed, in a high, shrill wail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With that tongue of metal pulsing its feebleness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it did not end like an echo, it gathered and rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was the Confederate sick on the other side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Cheering their own.</span>
					<span>The two weak crowd-voices met</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>In one piping, gull-like cry.</span>
					<span>Then the boats began</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>To take the weak men on board.</span>
					<span>Jack Ellyat walked</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his boat on stuffless legs. “Keep quiet,” he thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“You’re not through yet⁠—you won’t be through till you land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They can jerk you back, even now, if you look too pleased.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look like a soldier, damn you, and show them how.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thought was childish but it stiffened his back</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And got him into the boat.</span>
					<span>In the midst of the stream</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They passed a boat with Confederate prisoners</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>So near they could yell at each other.</span>
					<span>“Hello there, Yank.”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hello Reb”⁠ ⁠… “You look pretty sick⁠—don’t we feed you good?”⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“You don’t look so damn pretty, yourself”⁠ ⁠… “My, ain’t that a shame!”⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“You’ll look a lot sicker when Hooker gets after you.”⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hell, old Jack’ll take Hooker apart like a coffee-pot”⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Well, goodbye, Yank”⁠ ⁠… “Goodbye, Reb”⁠ ⁠… “Get fat if you kin.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So might meet and pass, perhaps, on a weedier stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Other boats, no more heavily charged, to a wet, black oar.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bailey watched the boat move away with its sick grey men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still yelling stingless insults through tired lips.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He cupped his hands to his mouth. “Oh⁠—” he roared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Then he sank back, coughing.</span>
					<span>“They look pretty bad,” he said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“They look glad to get back. They ain’t such bad Rebs at that.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The boat’s nose touched the wharf. It swung and was held.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They got out. They didn’t move toward the camp at first.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They looked back at the river first and the other side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without saying words. They stood there thus for a space</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a row of tattered cranes at the edge of a stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blinking at something.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“All right, you men,” said an officer. “Come along.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jack Ellyat’s heart made a sudden lump in his chest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was a blue officer. They were back in their lines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Back out of prison.</span>
					<span>Bailey whirled out his arm</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a great wheel gesture. “Hell,” he said in a low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moved voice, thumbed his nose across at the Stars and Bars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And burst into horrible tears. Jack Ellyat held him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Captain, when do we eat?” said the Jew in a wail.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
