<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Strike up, strike up for Wingate’s tune,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strike up for Sally Dupré!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strike up, strike up for the April moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the rain on the lilac spray!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Wingate Hall in its pride once more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the branch of myrtle over the door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because the men are back from the war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the clean bed waiting the dusty rider</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the punchbowl cooling for thirsty throttles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the hot cooks boiling the hams in cider</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Cudjo grinning at cobwebbed bottles⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last of the wine, the last of the wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last of the ’12 and the ’29!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three times voyaged around the Cape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till old Judge Brooke, with an oath oracular,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pronounced it the living soul of the grape,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the veriest dregs to be supernacular!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Old Judge Brooke with his double-chins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sighing over his hoarded claret</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sending the last of his cherished bins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the hospital-doctors with “I can spare it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if you give it to some damned layman</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who doesn’t know brandy from licorice-water</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sports a white ribbon, by fire and slaughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll hang the lot of you higher than Haman!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Wingate cellars are nearly bare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Miss Louisa is doing her hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the latest style of Napoleon’s court.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(A blockade-runner brought the report,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A blockade-runner carried the silk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heavy as bullion and white as milk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That makes Amanda a gleaming moth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the coasts are staked with a Union net</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the dark fish slip through the meshes yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shadows sliding without a light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the dark of the moon, in the dead of night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carrying powder, carrying cloth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hoops for the belle and guns for the fighter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guncotton, opium, bombs and tea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fashionplates, quinine and history.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Charleston’s corked with a Northern fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Bayou City lies at the feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a damn-the-torpedoes commodore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The net draws tighter and ever tighter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the fish dart past till the end of the war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Wilmington to the Rio Grande,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sandy Bahamas are Dixie Land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the crammed, black shadows start for the trip</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, once clean-run, will pay for the ship.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are caught, they are sunk with all aboard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They scrape through safely and praise the Lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ready to start with the next jammed hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pull Death’s whiskers out in the cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The unrecorded skippers and mates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom even their legend expurgates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tough daredevils from twenty ports</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who thumbed their noses at floating forts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gnawed through the bars of a giant’s cage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a cause or a laugh or a living-wage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who five years long on a sea of night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pumped new blood to the vein bled white</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—And, incidentally, made the money</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the strangely rich of the after years⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the flies will come to the open honey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, should war and hell have the same dimensions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both have been paved with the best intentions</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And both are as full of profiteers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The slaves in the quarters are buzzing and talking.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—All though the winter the ha’nts went walking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ha’nts the size of a horse or bigger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ghost-patrollers, scaring a nigger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now the winter’s over and broken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sun shines out like a lovin’ token,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s goin’ to be mixin’s and mighty doin’s,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chicken-fixin’s and barbecuin’s,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old Marse Billy’s a-comin’ home!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’s slewn a brigade with a ha’nts’s jaw-bone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’s slewn an army with one long sabre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’s scared old Linkum ‘most to death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now he’s comin’ home to rest from he labor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Play on he fiddle and catch he breath!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The little black children with velvet eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell each other tremendous lies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They play at Manassas with guns of peeled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Willow-stalks from the River Field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chasing the Yanks into Kingdom Come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While one of them beats on a catskin drum.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are happy because they don’t know why.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They scare themselves pretending to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all through the scare, and before and after,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their voices are rich with the ancient laughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The negro laughter, the blue-black rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The laughter that doesn’t end with the lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But shakes the belly and curls the toes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prickles the end of the fingertips.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Up through the garden, in through the door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That undercurrent of laughter floats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It mounts like a sea from floor to floor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dark sea, covering painted boats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A warm sea, smelling of earth and grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seeps through the back of the cheval-glass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Amanda stares at her stately self</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till her eyes are bright with a different spark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It sifts like a dye, where Louise’s peering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a shagreen-case for a garnet ear-ring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the little jewels shine in the dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It spills like a wave in the crowded kitchen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the last good sugar of Wingate Hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is frosting a cake like a Polar Highland</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fat Aunt Bess in her ice-wool shawl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spends the hoarded knowledge her heart is rich in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On oceans of trifle and floating-island.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fat Aunt Bess is older than Time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But her eyes still shine like a bright, new dime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though two generations have gone to rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the sleepy mountain of her breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wingate children in Wingate Hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the first weak cry in the bearing-bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She has petted and punished them, one and all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She has closed their eyes when they lay dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She raised Marse Billy when he was puny,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She cared for the Squire when he got loony,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fed him and washed him and combed his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nobody else would do instead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The matriarch of the weak and the young,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lazy crooning, comforting tongue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She has had children of her own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the white-skinned ones are bone of her bone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They may not be hers, but she is theirs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if the shares were unequal shares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She does not know it, now she is old.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They will keep her out of the rain and cold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some were naughty, and some were good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But she will be warm while they have wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rule them and spoil them and play physician</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the vast, insensate force of tradition,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half a nuisance and half a mother</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And legally neither one nor the other,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till at last they follow her to her grave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The family-despot, and the slave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>—Curious blossom from bitter ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Master of masters who left you bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who shall unravel the mingled strands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or read the anomaly of your hands?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They have made you a shrine and a humorous fable,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they kept you a slave while they were able,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet, there was something between the two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That you shared with them and they shared with you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brittle and dim, but a streak of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A genuine kindness, unbought, unsold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Graciousness founded on hopeless wrong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But queerly living and queerly strong.⁠ ⁠…</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There were three stout pillars that held up all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weight and tradition of Wingate Hall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One was Cudjo and one was you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the third was the mistress, Mary Lou.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mary Lou Wingate, as slightly made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as hard to break as a rapier-blade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bristol’s daughter and Wingate’s bride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never well since the last child died</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But staring at pain with courteous eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the pain outwits it, the body dies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meanwhile the body bears the pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She loved her hands and they made her vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tiny hands of her generation</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That gathered the reins of the whole plantation;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The velvet sheathing the steel demurely</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the trained, light grip that holds so surely.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She was at work by candlelight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She was at work in the dead of night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smoothing out troubles and healing schisms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And doctoring phthisics and rheumatisms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guiding the cooking and watching the baking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sewing, the soap-and-candle-making,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brewing, the darning, the lady-daughters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The births and deaths in the negro-quarters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeing that Suke had some new, strong shoes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Joe got a week in the calaboose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Dicey’s Jacob escaped a whipping</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the jellybag dripped with its proper dripping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the shirts and estrangements were neatly mended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all of the tasks that never ended.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Her manner was gracious but hardly fervent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she seldom raised her voice to a servant.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She was often mistaken, not often blind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she knew the whole duty of womankind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take the burden and have the power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seem like the well-protected flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To manage a dozen industries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a casual gesture in scraps of ease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hate the sin and to love the sinner</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to see that the gentlemen got their dinner</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ready and plenty and piping-hot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether you wanted to eat or not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And always, always, to have the charm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That makes the gentlemen take your arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But never the bright, unseemly spell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That makes strange gentlemen love too well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once you were married and settled down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a suitable gentleman of your own.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And when that happened, and you had bred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The requisite children, living and dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pity the fool and comfort the weak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And always let the gentlemen speak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To succor your love from deep-struck roots</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When gentlemen went to bed in their boots,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And manage a gentleman’s whole plantation</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the manner befitting your female station.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This was the creed that her mother taught her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the creed that she taught to every daughter.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She knew her Bible⁠—and how to flirt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a swansdown fan and a brocade skirt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For she trusted in God but she liked formalities</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the world and Heaven were both realities.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—In Heaven, of course, we should all be equal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, until we came to that golden sequel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gentility must keep to gentility</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where God and breeding had made things stable,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the rest of the cosmos deserved civility</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But dined in its boots at the second-table.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This view may be reckoned a trifle narrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it had the driving force of an arrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it helped Mary Lou to stand up straight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For she was gentle, but she could hate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she hated the North with the hate of Jael</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the dry hot hands went seeking the nail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The terrible hate of women’s ire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The smoky, the long-consuming fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Yankees were devils, and she could pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For devils, no doubt, upon Judgment Day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now in the world, she would hate them still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And send the gentlemen out to kill.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The gentlemen killed and the gentlemen died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But she was the South’s incarnate pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That mended the broken gentlemen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sent them out to the war again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That kept the house with the men away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And baked the bricks where there was no clay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made courage from terror and bread from bran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And propped the South on a swansdown fan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through four long years of ruin and stress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pride⁠—and the deadly bitterness.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Let us look at her now, let us see her plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She will never be quite like this again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her house is rocking under the blast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she hears it tremble, and still stands fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But this is the last, this is the last.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last of the wine and the white corn meal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last high fiddle singing the reel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last of the silk with the Paris label,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last blood-thoroughbred safe in the stable</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—Yellow corn meal and a jackass colt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A door that swings on a broken bolt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brittle old letters spotted with tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a wound that rankles for fifty years⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is the last of Wingate Hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last bright August before the Fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Death has been near, and Death has passed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But this is the last, this is the last.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There will be hope, and a scratching pen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There will be cooking for tired men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The waiting for news with shut, hard fists,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the blurred, strange names in the battle-lists,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The April sun and the April rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But never this day come back again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But she is lucky, she does not see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The axe-blade sinking into the tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Day after day, with a slow, sure stroke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till it chops the mettle from Wingate oak.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The house is busy, the cups are filling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To welcome the gentlemen back from killing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hams are boiled and the chickens basting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fat Aunt Bess is smiling and tasting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cudjo’s napkin is superfine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knows how the gentlemen like their wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amanda is ready, Louisa near her.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glistering girls from a silver mirror,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Everyone talking, everyone scurrying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upstairs and downstairs, laughing and hurrying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Everyone giving and none denying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is only living, there is no dying.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>War is a place but it is not here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The peace and the victory are too near.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One more battle, and Washington taken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Yankees mastered, the South unshaken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fiddlers again, and the pairing season,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old-time rhyme and the old-time reason,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grandchildren, and the growing older</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till at last you need a gentleman’s shoulder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the pain can stop, for the frayed threads sever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the house and the courtesy last forever.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Wingate found it, riding at ease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cloud-edge lifting over the trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A white-sail glimmer beyond the rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sugar-castle that strained the eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then mounting, mounting, the shining spectre</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Risen at last from the drop of nectar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cloud expanding, the topsails swelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The doll’s house grown to a giant’s dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Porches and gardens and ells and wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Linking together like puzzle-rings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the parts dissolved in a steadfast whole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Wingate saw it, body and soul.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Saw it completely, and saw it gleam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The full-rigged vessel, the sailing dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brick and stone that were somehow quick</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a ghost not native to stone and brick,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The name held high and the gift passed on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Wingate father to Wingate son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No longer a house but a conjur-stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That could hate and sorrow and hold its own</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As long as the seed of Elspeth Mackay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could mix its passion with Wingate clay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the wind and the river had memories.⁠ ⁠…</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wingate saw it all⁠—but with altered eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was not yet broken on any wheel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had no wound of the flesh to heal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had seen one battle, but he was still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The corn unground by the watermill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had ridden the rainy winter through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he and Black Whistle were good as new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Black Horse Troop still carried its pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rode as the Yankees could not ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, when he remembered a year-old dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something had come and something gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even now, when he smelt the Spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his heart was hot with his homecoming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was a whisper in his ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That said what he did not wish to hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“This is the last, this is the last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurry, hurry, this is the last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drink the wine before yours is spilled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kiss the sweetheart before you’re killed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She will be loving, and she will grieve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wear your heart on her golden sleeve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And marry your friend when he gets his leave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It does not matter that you are still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The corn unground by the watermill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stones grind till they get their will.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pluck the flower that hands can pluck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touch the walls of your house for luck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eat of the fat and drink the sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is little savor in dead men’s meat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It does not matter that you once knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Future and past and a different you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That went by when the wind first blew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is no future, there is no past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is only this hour and it goes fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurry, hurry, this is the last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is the last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is the last.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He heard it and faced it and let it talk.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tired horses dropped to a walk.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then Black Whistle lunged at the bit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whinnied because he was alive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he saw the porch where the evenings sit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the tall magnolias shading the drive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He heard the bell of his father’s mirth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Tallyho, Yanks⁠—we’ve gone to earth!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Home, boy, home to Wingate Hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Home in spite of them, damn them all!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was stabbed by the rays of the setting sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He felt Black Whistle break to a run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then he was really there again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before he had time to think or check,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a boy was holding his bridle-rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Mary Lou’s arms were around his neck.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Sally Dupré and Wingate talk with the music.⁠ ⁠…</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The dance. Such a lovely dance. But you dance so lightly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amanda dances so well. But you dance so lightly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Do you remember the other dance?)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phil Ferrier was here, remember, last year.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(He danced with me. He could dance rather well. He is dead.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We were all so sorry when we heard about Phil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(How long will you live and be able to dance with me?)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yes. Phil was a fine fellow. We all liked Phil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Do not talk of the dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At first we talk of the dead, we write of the dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We send their things to their people when we can find them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We write letters to you about them, we say we liked him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fought well, he died bravely, here is his sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here is his pistol, his letters, his photograph case;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You will like to have these things, they will do instead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the war goes on too long.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After a while you still want to talk of the dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we are too tired. We will send you the pistol still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The photograph-case, the knickknacks, if we can find them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the war has gone on too long.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We cannot talk to you still, as we used to, about the dead.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nancy Huguenot’s here tonight. Have you danced with her yet?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She didn’t want to come. She was brave to come.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Phil Ferrier was Nancy’s lover.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She sent him off. She cut her hair for a keepsake.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were going to be married as soon as he came back.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a long time she dressed in black.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then one morning she rose, and looked at the sun on the wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She put on a dress with red sleeves and a red, striped shawl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She said “Phil was my beau. He wouldn’t have liked me in black.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She used to cry quite a lot but she hasn’t cried much since then.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I think she’ll get well and marry somebody else.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I think she’s right. If I had to wear grief for a lover,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wouldn’t wear black.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would wear my best green silk and my Empire sacque</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And walk in the garden at home and feel the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blow through my rags of honor forever and ever.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after that, when I married some other beau,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would make a good wife and raise my children on sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Milk, not on poison, though it might have been so.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my husband would never know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he turned to me, when I kissed him, when we were kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I cleaned his coat, when we talked about dresses and weather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had married something that belonged to the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And felt the blind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And always stream of that wind on her too-light bones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither fast nor slow, but never checked or resigned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blowing through rags of honor forever and ever.)</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They are calling for partners again. Shall we dance again?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Why do we hate each other so well, when we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are tied together by something that will not free us?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I see you across a room, I will go to you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If you see me across a room, you will come to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet we hate each other.)</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Not yet, for a minute. I want to watch for a minute.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(I do not hate you. I love you. But you must take me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will not take your leavings nor you my pity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I must break you first for a while and you must break me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We are too strong to love the surrendered city.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So we hate each other.)</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That’s a pretty girl over there. Beautiful hair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(She is the porcelain you play at being.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yes, isn’t she. Her name is Lucy Weatherby.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(I hate her hair. I hate her porcelain air.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She can’t be from the county or I’d remember her.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(I know that kind of mouth. Your mouth is not that.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your mouth is generous and bitter and sweet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I kissed your mouth, I would have to be yours forever.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her mouth is pretty. You could kiss it awhile.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, they’re kin to the Shepleys. Lucy comes from Virginia.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(I know that kind of mouth. I know that hair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know the dolls you like to take in your hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dolls that all men like to take in their hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will not fight with a doll for you or any one.)</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We’d better dance now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Lucy Weatherby.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When this dance is done, I will leave you and dance with her.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know that shallow but sufficient mouth.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As you please.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Lucy Weatherby.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will make an image of you, a doll in wax.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will pierce the little wax palms with silver bodkins.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, I will not.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That’s good music. It beats in your head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(It beats in the head, it beats in the head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It ties the heart with a scarlet thread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is the last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is the last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurry, hurry, this is the last.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We dance on a floor of polished sleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the little cracks are beginning to meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the play of our dancing feet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I do not care. I am Wingate still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The corn unground by the watermill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I am yours while the fiddles spill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But my will has a knife to cut your will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My birds will never come to your hill.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>You are my foe and my only friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You are the steel I cannot bend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You are the water at the world’s end.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Wingate Hall must tumble down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tumble down, tumble down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dream dissolving, a ruined thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before we can melt from the shattered crown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gold enough for a wedding-ring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Wingate Hall must lie in the dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the wood rot and the iron rust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the vines grow over the broken bust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before we meet without hate or pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before we talk as lover and bride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the daggers of our offence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have the color of innocence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nothing is said and all is said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we go looking for secret bread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lie together in the same bed.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yes, it’s good music, hear it lift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(It is too mellow, it is too swift,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am dancing alone in my naked shift,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am dancing alone in the snowdrift.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You are my lover and you my life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My peace and my unending strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the edge of the knife against my knife.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will not make you a porcelain wife.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We are linked together for good and all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the still pool and the waterfall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But you are married to Wingate Hall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Wingate Hall must tumble down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tumble down, tumble down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wingate Hall must tumble down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An idol broken apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before I sew on a wedding gown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stitch my name in your heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Wingate Hall must lie in the grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the silk stain and the rabbits pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sparrows wash in the gilded glass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the fire of our anger smothers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And our sorrows can laugh at their lucky brothers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the knives of our enmity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are buried under the same green tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nothing is vowed and all is vowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we have forgotten how to be proud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we sleep like cherubs in the same cloud.)</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Lucy Weatherby, cuddled up in her bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drifted along toward sleep with a smile on her mouth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I was pretty tonight,” she thought, “I was pretty tonight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blue’s my color⁠—blue that matches my eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I always ought to wear blue. I’m sorry for girls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who can’t wear that sort of blue. Her name is Sally</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But she’s too dark to wear the colors I can,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’d like to give her my blue dress and see her wear it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>She’d look too gawky, poor thing.</span>
					<span>He danced with her</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a while at first but I hadn’t danced with him then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He danced with me after that. He’s rather a dear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wonder how long he’ll be here. I think I like him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I think I’m going to be pretty while I am here.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lucy Weatherby⁠—Lucy Shepley⁠—Lucy Wingate⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Huger’s so jealous, nearly as jealous as Curly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poor Curly⁠—I ought to answer his mother’s letter</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But it’s so hard answering letters.”</span>
					<span>She cried a little,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thinking of Curly. The tears were fluent and warm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They did not sting in her eyes. They made her feel brave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She could hardly remember Curly any more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it was right to cry for him, now and then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slight tears at night and a long, warm, dreamless sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>That left you looking pretty.</span>
					<span>She dried the tears</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thought to herself with a pleasant little awe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“You really are mighty brave, dear. You really are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nobody would think your beau was killed at Manassas.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—She could hardly remember Curly any more⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She tried to make Curly’s face come out of the darkness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it was too hard⁠—the other faces kept coming⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Huger Shepley and all the Virginia boys</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now this new boy’s face with the dark, keen eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Boys who were privates, boys who were majors and captains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nice old Generals who patted your shoulder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darling convalescents who called you an angel⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A whole, great lucky-bag of nice, thrilling boys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fighting for you⁠—and the South and the Cause, of course.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You were a flame for the Cause. You sang songs about it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You sent white feathers to boys who didn’t enlist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bunches of flowers to boys who were suitably wounded.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You wouldn’t dream of making peace with the North</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While a single boy was left to fight for the Cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And they called you the Dixie Angel.</span>
					<span>They fought for the Cause</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But you couldn’t help feeling, too, that they fought for you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when they died for you⁠—and the Cause and the flag⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your heart was tender enough. You were willing to say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You had been engaged to them, even when you hadn’t</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And answer their mothers’ letters in a sweet way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Though answering letters was hard.</span>
					<span>She cuddled closer,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Pillow, tell me I’m pretty, tell me I’m lovely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me I’m nicer than anybody you know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me that nice new boy is thinking about me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me that Sally girl couldn’t wear my blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me the war won’t end till we’ve whipped the Yankees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me I’ll never get wrinkles and always have beaus.”</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>The slave got away from Zachary’s place that night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was a big fellow named Spade with one cropped ear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had splay feet and sometimes walked with a limp.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His back was scarred. He was black as a pine at night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’d tried to run away a couple of times</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—That was how he got some of the marks you could tell him by⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he’d been pretty quiet now for a year or so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And they thought he had settled down.</span>
					<span>When he got away</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He meant to kill Zachary first but the signs weren’t right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He talked to the knife but the knife didn’t sweat or heat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>So he just got away instead.</span>
					<span>When he reached the woods</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And was all alone, he was pretty scared for a while,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he kept on going all night by the big soft stars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loping as fast as he could on his long splay feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when morning broke, he knew he was safe for a time.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He came out on a cleared place, then. He saw the red</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Sun spill over the trees.</span>
					<span>He threw his pack</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down on the ground and started to laugh and laugh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Spade, boy, Spade, you’s lucky to git dis far.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You never managed to git dis far before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>De Lawd’s sho’ly with you, Spade.”</span>
					<span>He ate and drank.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He drew a circle for Zachary’s face in the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spat in the circle. Then he thought of his woman.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“She’s sho’ly a grievin’ woman dis mawnin’, Spade.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thought made him sad at first, but he soon cheered up.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“She’ll do all right as soon as she’s thu with grievin’.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grievin’ yaller gals always does all right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Next time I’se gwine to git me a coal-black gal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>I’se tired of persimmon-skins.</span>
					<span>I’se gwine to break loose.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>De signs is right dis time. I’se gwine to be free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Free in de Norf.”</span>
					<span>He saw himself in the North.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had a stovepipe hat and a coal-black gal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had a white-folks’ house and a regular mule.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He worked for money and nobody ever owned him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He got religion and dollars and lucky dice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And everybody he passed in the white folks’ street</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said “Good mawnin’, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Spade⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Spade, good mawnin’.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He chuckled aloud. “Good mawnin’, Mistuh Spade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gwine to be free, Mistuh Spade⁠—yes, suh, Mistuh Spade!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a lazy moment, he was already there⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then he stiffened, nostrils flaring, at a slight sound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>It couldn’t be dogs already.</span>
					<span>“Jesus,” he whispered,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sweet, lovin’ Jesus, don’t let ’em git me again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burn me up, but don’t let ’em git me again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Dey’s gwine to cut me apart.”</span>
					<span>The rabbit ran past.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stared at it for a moment with wild, round eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Started a yell of laughter⁠—and choked it off.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Dat ain’t no nachul rabbit dere, Spade, boy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dat’s a sign. Yes, suh. You better start makin’ tracks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Take your foot in your hand, Mistuh Spade.”</span>
					<span>He swung the bundle</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up on his shoulders and slid along through the trees.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bundle was light. He was going to be hungry soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the big splay feet would soon be bleeding and sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, as he went, he shook with uncanny chuckles.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Good mawnin’, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Spade⁠—glad to see you dis mawnin’!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How’s <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Spade, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Spade?”</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Sally Dupré, from the high porch of her house</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Stared at the road.</span>
					<span>They would be here soon enough.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She had waved a flag the last time they went away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This time she would wave her hand or her handkerchief.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That was what women did. The column passed by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the women waved, and it came back and they waved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, in between, if you loved, you lived by a dull</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clock of long minutes that passed like sunbonneted women</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each with the same dry face and the same set hands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>I have read, they have told me that love is a pretty god</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>
						<em>With light wings stuck to his shoulders.</em>
					</span>
					<span>
						<em>They did not tell me</em>
					</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>That love is nursing a hawk with yellow eyes,</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>That love is feeding your heart to the beak of the hawk</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Because an old woman, gossiping, uttered a name.</em>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They were coming now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She remembered the first time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were different now. They rode with a different rein.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They rode all together. They knew where they were going.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were famous now, but she wondered about the fame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet, as she wondered, she felt the tears in her blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Because they could ride so easily.</span>
					<span>He was there.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She fed her heart to the hawk and watched him ride.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She thought, “But they like this, too. They are like small boys</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Going off to cook potatoes over a fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep in the woods, where no women can ever come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To say how blackened and burnt the potatoes are</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how you could cook them better back in a house.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, they like to come home. When they’re sick they like to come home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They dream about home⁠—they write you they want to come back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they come back and live in the house for a while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And raise their sons to hear the same whistle-tune</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the window, the whistle calling the boys</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Out to the burnt potatoes.</span>
					<span>O whistler Death,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What have we done to you in a barren month,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a sterile hour, that our lovers should die before us?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then she thought. “No, no, I can’t bear it. It cannot be borne.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And knowing this, bore it.</span>
					<span>He saw her. He turned his horse.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If he comes here, I can’t keep it back, I can’t keep it back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can’t stand it, don’t let him come.” He was coming now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rides well, she thought, while her hands made each other cold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will have to remember how. And his face is sharper.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The moustache quite changes his face. The face that I saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While he was away was clean-shaven and darker-eyed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I must change that, now. I will have to remember that.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>It is very important.</span>
					<span>He swung from Black Whistle’s back.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His spurs made a noise on the porch. She twisted her hands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If I shut my eyes, I can make him kiss me. I will not.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They were saying goodbye, now. She heard polite voices saying it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the voices ended. “No, no, it is not to be borne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>It is the last twist of the vise.”</span>
					<span>Her will snapped then.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When she looked at him, she knew that the knives were edgeless.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In an instant life would begin, life would be forever.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His eyes wavered. There was a thin noise in her ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>A noise from the road.</span>
					<span>The instant fell and lay dead</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between them like something broken.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She turned to see what had killed it.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lucy Weatherby, reining a bright bay mare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Played with the braided lash of a riding-whip</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And talked to Wingate’s father with smiling eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Huger Shepley tried to put in a word</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And the whole troop clustered about her.</span>
					<span>Her habit was black</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But she had a knot of bright ribbons pinned at her breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Red and blue⁠—the Confederate colors.</span>
					<span>They had cheered her.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They had cheered her, riding along with her colored ribbons.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>It was that which had killed the instant.</span>
					<span>Sally looked</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the face with the new moustache she had to remember.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Good-bye,” she said. The face bent over her hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And kissed it acceptably.</span>
					<span>Then the face had gone.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was back with the others now. She watched for a minute.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lucy was unpinning her knot of ribbons.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She saw a dozen hands go up for the knot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Lucy laugh her sweet laugh and shake her bright head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glance once at Huger Shepley and once at Clay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then toss the colored knot to the guidon-bearer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who grinned and tied the ribbons around the staff</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>While some of them cheered again.</span>
					<span>Then the horses moved.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They went by Lucy. Lucy was waving her hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She had tears in her eyes and was saying brave words to the soldiers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sally watched a back and a horse go out of sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She was tired, then.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the troop had quite disappeared</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Lucy rode up to the house.</span>
					<span>The two women kissed</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And talked for a while about riding-habits and war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I just naturally love every boy in the Black Horse Troop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Don’t you, Sally darling? They’re all so nice and polite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quite like our Virginia boys, and the Major’s a dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that nice little one with the guidon is perfectly sweet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You ought to have heard what he said when I gave him the knot.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though, of course, I can tell why you didn’t come down to the road,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>War’s terrible, isn’t it? All those nice boys going off⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I feel just the way you do, darling⁠—we just have to show them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whenever we can that we know they are fighting for us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fighting for God and the South and the cause of the right⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Law, Chile, don’t you fret about whether you’s pretty or plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You just do what you kin, and the good Lawd’ll brighten your tracks.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That’s what my old mammy would tell me when I was knee-high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I always remember and just try to do what I can</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the boys and the wounded and⁠—well, that’s it, isn’t it, dear?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’ve all got to do what we can in this horrible war.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sally agreed that we had, and drank from a cup.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She thought. “Lucy Weatherby. Yes. I must look for a doll.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I must make a doll with your face, an image of wax.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I must call that doll by your name.”</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Now the scene expands, we must look at the scene as a whole.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How are the gameboards chalked and the pieces set?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is an Eastern game and a Western game.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the West, blue armies try to strangle the long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snake of the Mississippi with iron claws;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Buell and Grant against Bragg and Beauregard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They have hold of the head of the snake where it touches the Gulf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New Orleans is taken, the fangs of the forts drawn out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ambiguous Butler wins ambiguous fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By issuing orders stating that any lady</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who insults a Union soldier in uniform</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall be treated as a streetwalker plying her trade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The orders are read and hated. The insults stop</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the ladies remember Butler for fifty years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make a fabulous devil with pasteboard horns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—“Beast” Butler, the fiend who pilfered the silver spoons⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a slightly-tarnished, crude-minded, vain politician</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who loved his wife and ached to be a great man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You were not wise with the ladies, Benjamin Butler,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It has been disproved that you stole New Orleans spoons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the story will chime at the ribs of your name and stain it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ghost-silver, clinking against the ribs of a ghost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>As long as the ladies have tongues.</span>
					<span>Napoleon was wiser</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he could not silence one ugly, clever De Staël.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make war on the men⁠—the ladies have too-long memories.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The head of the snake is captured⁠—the tail gripped fast⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the body in between still writhes and resists,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vicksburg is still unfallen⁠—Grant not yet master⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sheridan, Sherman, Thomas still in the shadow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eyes of the captains are fixed on the Eastern game,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The presidents⁠—and the watchers oversea⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For there are the two defended kings of the board,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Muddy Washington, with its still-unfinished Capitol,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprawling, badly-paved, beset with sharp hogs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That come to the very doorsteps and grunt for crumbs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full of soldiers and clerks, full of all the baggage of war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Bombproof” officers, veterans back on leave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Recruits, spies, spies on the spies, politicians, contractors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reporters, slackers, ambassadors, bands and harlots,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Negro-boys who organize butting-matches</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To please the recruits, tattooers and fortune-tellers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rich man, poor man, soldier, beggarman, thief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one most lonely man in a drafty White House</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose everlasting melancholy runs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a deep stream under the funny stories,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The parable-maker, humble in many things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But seldom humble with his fortitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sorrowful man who cracked the sure-fire jokes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roared over Artemus Ward and Orpheus <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Kerr</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drove his six cross mules with a stubborn hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He has lost a son, but he has no time to grieve for him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He studies tactics now till late in the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the same painful, hewing industry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He put on studying law.</span>
					<span>McClellan comes,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>McClellan goes, McClellan bustles and argues,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>McClellan is too busy to see the President,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>McClellan complains of this, complains of that,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Government is not supporting him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Government cannot understand grand strategy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The Government⁠—</span>
					<span>McClellan feels abused.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>McClellan is quite sincere and sometimes right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They come to the lonely man about McClellan</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>With various tales.</span>
					<span>McClellan lacks respect,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>McClellan dreams about a dictatorship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>McClellan does that and this.</span>
					<span>The lonely man</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listens to all the stories and remarks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If McClellan wins, I will gladly hold his horse.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A hundred miles away in an arrow-line</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lies the other defended king of the giant chess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Broad-streeted Richmond.</span>
					<span>All the baggage of war</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is here as well, the politicians, the troops,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The editors who scream at the government,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slackers, the good and the bad, but the flavor is different:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is something older here, and smaller and courtlier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trees in the streets are old trees used to living with people,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Family-trees that remember your grandfather’s name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is still a clan-city, a family-city, a city</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thinks of the war, on the whole, as a family-matter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A woman city, devoted and fiercely jealous</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As any of the swan-women who ruled it then⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ready to give their lives and hearts for the South,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But already a little galled by Jefferson Davis</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And finding him rather too much of a doctrinaire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a certain comparative touch of the parvenu.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He is not from Virginia, we never knew his grandfather.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The South is its husband, the South is not quite its master.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It has a soul while Washington is a symbol,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful, witty, feminine, narrow and valiant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwisely-chosen, perhaps, for a king of the game,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But playing the part with a definite air of royalty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until, in the end, it stands for the South completely</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when it falls, the sword of the South snaps short.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At present, the war has not yet touched it home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>McClellan has landed, on the Peninsula,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But his guns are still far away.</span>
					<span>The ladies go</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Davis’s parties in last year’s dresses.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon they are to cut the green and white chintz curtains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That shade their long drawing-rooms from the lazy sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bandage the stricken wounded of Seven Pines.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The lonely man with the chin like John Calhoun’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Works hard and is ill at ease in his Richmond White House.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His health was never too strong⁠—it is tiring now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under a mass of detail, under the strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of needless quarrels with secretaries and chiefs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a Congress already beginning to criticize him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He puts his trust in God with a charmed devotion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his faith, too often, in men who can feed his vanity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They mock him for it. He cannot understand mocking.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is something in him that prickles the pride of men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom Lincoln could have used, and makes them his foes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joe Johnston and he have been at odds from the first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beauregard and he are at odds and will be at odds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>One could go through a list⁠—</span>
					<span>He is quite as stubborn as Lincoln</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In supporting the people he trusts through thick and thin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But⁠—except for Lee⁠—the people he trusts so far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seldom do the work that alone can repay the trust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They fail in the end and his shoulders carry the failure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leave him, in spite of his wife, in spite of his God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lonely, beginning and end, with that other’s loneliness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other man could have understood him and used him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He could never have used or comprehended the other.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>It is their measure.</span>
					<span>And yet, a deep loneliness,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A deep devotion, a deep self-sacrifice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Binds the strange two together.</span>
					<span>He, too, is to lose</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A child in his White House, ere his term is accomplished.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He, too, is to be the scapegoat for all defeat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he is to know the ultimate bitterness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cause lost after every expense of mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bear himself with decent fortitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the prison where the other would not have kept him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One cannot balance tragedy in the scales</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unless one weighs it with the tragic heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other man’s tragedy was the greater one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since the blind fury tore the huger heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But this man’s tragedy is the more pitiful.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the Eastern board and the two defended kings.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But why is the game so ordered, what crowns the kings?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are cities of streets and houses like other cities.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Baltimore might be taken, and war go on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atlanta will be taken and war go on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why should these two near cities be otherwise?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We do not fight for the real but for shadows we make.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A flag is a piece of cloth and a word is a sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we make them something neither cloth nor a sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Totems of love and hate, black sorcery-stones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>So with these cities.</span>
					<span>And so the third game is played,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The intricate game of the watchers oversea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shadow that falls like the shadow of a hawk’s wing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the double-chessboard until the end⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shadow of Europe, the shadows of England and France,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The war of the cotton against the iron and wheat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shadows ponder and mutter, biding their time;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the knights and bishops that play for the cotton-king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can take the capital-city of wheat and iron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shadow-hands will turn into hands of steel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And intervene for the cotton that feeds the mills.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if the fable throned on a cotton-bale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is checkmated by the pawns of iron and wheat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shadows will pause, and cleave to iron and wheat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They will go their ways and lift their eyes from the game,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For iron and wheat are not to be lightly held.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>So the watchers, searching the board.</span>
					<span>And so the game.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blockade grips, the blockade-runners break through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are duels and valors, the Western game goes on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the snake of the Mississippi is tamed at last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the fight in the East is the fight between the two kings.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If Richmond is threatened, we threaten Washington,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You check our king with McClellan or Hooker or Grant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We will check your king with Jackson or Early or Lee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you must draw back strong pieces to shield your king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For we hold the chord of the circle and you the arc</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we can shift our pieces better than you.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So it runs for years until Jubal Early, riding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A long twelve months after Gettysburg’s high tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sees the steeples of Washington prick the blue June sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Northern king is threatened for the last time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, by then, the end is too near, the cotton is withered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now the game still hangs in the balance⁠—the cotton in bloom⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shadows of the watchers long on the board.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>McClellan has moved his men from their camps at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>In a great sally.</span>
					<span>There are many gates he can try.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Valley gate and the old Manassas way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he has chosen to ferry his men by sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the ragged half-island between the York and the James</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thrust up a long, slant arm from Fortress Monroe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Northwest toward Richmond.</span>
					<span>The roads are sticky and soft,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are forts at Yorktown and unmapped rivers to cross.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He has many more men than Johnston or John Magruder</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the country hinders him, and he hinders himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By always thinking the odds on the other side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that witches of ruin haunt each move he makes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But even so⁠—he has boarded that jutting deck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That is the Peninsula, and his forces creep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slowly toward Richmond, slowly up to the high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Defended captain’s cabin of the great ship.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—There was another force that came from its ships</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take a city set on a deck of land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cause unlike, but the fighting no more stark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The doom no fiercer, the fame no harder to win.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are no gods to come with a golden smoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here in the mud between the York and the James</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wrap some high-chinned hero away from death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are only Bibles and buckles and cartridge belts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sometimes stop a bullet before it kills</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But oftener let it pass.</span>
					<span>And when Sarpedon</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Falls and the heavy darkness stiffens his limbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They will let him lie where he fell, they will not wash him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the running streams of Scamander, the half-divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They will bury him in a shallow and cumbered pit.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, if you would sing of fighters, sing of these men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sing of Fair Oaks and the battered Seven Days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not of the raging of Ajax, the cry of Hector,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These men were not gods nor shielded by any gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were men of our shape: they fought as such men may fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a mortal skill: when they died it was as men die.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Army of the Potomac, advancing army,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alloy of a dozen disparate, alien States,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>City-boy, farm-hand, bounty-man, first volunteer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old regular, drafted recruit, paid substitute,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men who fought through the war from First Bull Run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And other men, nowise different in look or purpose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom the first men greeted at first with a ribald cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Here they come! Two hundred dollars and a ka-ow!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rocks from New England and hickory-chunks from the West,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bowery boy and clogging Irish adventurer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Germans who learnt their English under the shells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or didn’t have time to learn it before they died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confused, huge weapon, forged from such different metals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Misused by unlucky swordsmen till you were blunt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then reforged with anguish and bloody sweat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be blunted again by one more unlucky captain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Against the millstone of Lee.</span>
					<span>Good stallion,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ridden and ridden against a hurdle of thorns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By uncertain rider after uncertain rider.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rider fails and you shiver and catch your breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They plaster your wounds and patch up your broken knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then, just as you know the grip of your rider’s hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And begin to feel at home with his horseman’s tricks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another rider comes with a different seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lunges you at the bitter hurdle again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it beats you again⁠—and it all begins from the first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The patching of wounds, the freezing in winter camps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vain mud-marches, the diarrhea, the wastage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grand reviews, the talk in the newspapers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sour knowledge that you were wasted again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not as Napoleons waste for a victory</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But blindly, unluckily⁠—</span>
					<span>until at last</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After long years, at fish-hook Gettysburg,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blade and the millstone meet and the blade holds fast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, after that, the chunky man from the West,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stranger to you, not one of the men you loved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As you loved McClellan, a rider with a hard bit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Takes you and uses you as you could be used,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wasting you grimly but breaking the hurdle down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You are never to worship him as you did McClellan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But at the last you can trust him. He slaughters you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he sees that you are fed. After sullen Cold Harbor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They call him a butcher and want him out of the saddle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But you have had other butchers who did not win</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And this man wins in the end.</span>
					<span>You see him standing,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reading a map, unperturbed, under heavy fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You do not cheer him as the recruits might cheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But you say “Ulysses doesn’t scare worth a darn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses is all right. He can finish the job.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at last your long lines go past in the Grand Review</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And your legend and his begins and are mixed forever.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now, though, he is still just one of the Western leaders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And Little Mac is your darling.</span>
					<span>You are unshaken</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the ruin of Fredericksburg, the wounds of Antietam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chancellorsville is a name in the Wilderness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your pickets, posted in front of the Chickahominy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear the churchbells of Richmond, ringing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listen well to those bells, they are very near tonight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But you will not hear from them again for three harsh years.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Black months of war, hard-featured, defeated months</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between Fair Oaks and Gettysburg,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What is your tale for this army?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What do the men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So differently gathered for your word to devour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say to your ears, deaf with cannon? What do they bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In powder-pocked hands to the heart of the burst shell?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us read old letters awhile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us try to hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thin, forgotten voices of men forgotten</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crying out of torn scraps of paper, notes scribbled and smudged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On aces, on envelope-backs, on gilt-edged cards stolen out of a dead man’s haversack.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>—Two brothers lay on the field of Fredericksburg</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the assault had failed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were unwounded but they could not move,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sharpshooters covered that patch of ground too well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They had a breastwork to hide them from the bullets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shelter of two dead men. One had lost his back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scooped out from waist to neck with a solid shot.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other’s legs were gone. They made a good breastwork.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brothers lay behind them, flat in the mud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All Sunday till night came down and they could creep off.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They did not dare move their hands for fourteen hours.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—A middle-aged person named Fletcher from Winchester</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enlisted in the Massachusetts Sharpshooters.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was a crack-duckshooter, skilful and patient.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They gave him the wrong sort of rifle and twenty rounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And told him to join his company.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It took him days to find it. He had no rations,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He begged bread and green corn and peaches and shot a hog;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So got there at last. He joined just before Antietam.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’d never been drilled but he knew how to shoot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though at first his hands kept shaking.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“It was different kind of gunning from what I was used to,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I was mad with myself that I acted so like a coward.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But as soon as they let him lie down and fight on his own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He felt all right. He had nineteen cartridges now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The first five each killed a man⁠—he was a good shot⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the rifle fouled. He began to get up and fix it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mechanically. A bullet went through his lung.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He lay on the field all day. At the end of the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was captured, sent to prison, paroled after weeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Died later, because of the wound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That was his war⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Other voices, rising out of the scraps of paper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till they mix in a single voice that says over and over</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“It is cold. It is wet. We marched till we couldn’t stand up.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is muddy here. I wish you could see us here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wish everybody at home could see us here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They would know what war is like. We are still patriotic.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We are going to fight. We hope this general’s good.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We hope he can make us win. We’ll do all we can.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I wish we could show everybody who stays at home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What this is like.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Voices of tired men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sick, convalescent, afraid of being sick.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The diarrhea is bad. I hope I don’t get it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But everybody seems to get it sometime.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I felt sick last night. I thought I was going to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Jim rubbed me and I feel better. There’s just one thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I hope I never get sent to the hospital,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You don’t get well when you go to the hospital.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’d rather be shot and killed quick.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Nurses and doctors, savagely, tenderly working,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trying to beat off death without enough knowledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trying and failing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clara Barton, Old Mother Bickerdyke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Overworked evangels of common sense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nursing, tending, clearing a ruthless path</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the cant and red tape, through the petty jealousies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the bitter front, bringing up the precious supplies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In spite of hell and high water and pompous fools,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the deadly place where the surgeons’ hands grew stiff</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the load of anguish they had to deal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where they bound men’s wounds and swabbed them with green corn leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There being no other lint.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whitman, with his sack of tobacco and comfits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passing along the terrible, crowded wards,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listening, writing letters, trying to breathe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strong life into lead-colored lips.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He does what he can. The doctors do what they can.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nurses save a life here and another there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the sick men die like flies in the hospitals.)</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Voices of boys and men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Homesick, stubborn, talking of little things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“We get better food. I’m getting to be a good cook.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The food’s bad. The whole company yelled ‘Hard Bread!’ today.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are only three professed Christians in my whole regiment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I feel sad about that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wish you could see the way we have to live here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wish everybody at home could see what it’s like.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s muddy. It’s cold. My shoes gave out on the march.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We lost the battle. The general was drunk.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is the roughest life that you ever saw.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I ever get back home⁠—”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, over and over, in stiff, patriotic phrases,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I am resigned to die for the Union, mother.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If we die in this battle, we will have died for the right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We will have died bravely⁠—you can trust us for that.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is only right to die for our noble Union.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We will save it or die for it. There’s just one thing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I hope I die quick. I hope I don’t have to die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the hospital.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is one thought that to me is worse than death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(This, they say over and over) it is the thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of being buried as they bury us here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After a battle. Sometimes they barely cover us.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I feel sick when I think of getting buried like that,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though if nothing except our death will rescue our Union,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You can trust us to die for it.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, through it all, the deep diapason swelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“It is cold. We are hungry. We marched all day in the mud.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We could barely stand when we got back into camp.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Don’t believe a thing the newspapers say about us.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>It’s all damn lies.</span>
					<span>We are willing to die for our Union,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I wish you could all of you see what this is like,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nobody at home can imagine what it is like.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We are ready to fight. We know we can fight and win.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But why will they waste us in fights that cannot be won?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When will we get a man that can really lead us?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These are the articulate that write the letters.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The inarticulate merely undergo.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are times of good food and times of campfire jokes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Times of good weather, times of partial success</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>In those two years.</span>
					<span>“The mail came. Thanks for the papers.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We had a good feed at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wilson’s place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I feel fine today. We put on a show last night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You ought to have seen Jim Wheeler in ‘Box and Cox.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our little band of Christians meets often now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the spirit moves in us strongly, praise be to God.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The President reviewed us two days ago.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You should have seen it, father, it was majestic.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have never seen a more magnificent sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It makes me proud to be part of such an army.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We got the tobacco. The socks came. I’m feeling fine.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that⁠—but still the deep diapason throbs</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Under the rest.</span>
					<span>The cold. The mud. The bleak wonder.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weakening sickness⁠—the weevils tainting the bread⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We were beaten again in spite of all we could do.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We don’t know what went wrong but something went wrong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When will we find a man who can really lead us?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When will we not be wasted without success?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Army of the Potomac, army of brave men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beaten again and again but never quite broken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You are to have the victory in the end</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But these bleak months are your anguish.</span>
					<span>Your voice dies out.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us hear the voice of your steadfast enemy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Army of Northern Virginia, fabulous army,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strange army of ragged individualists,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hunters, the riders, the walkers, the savage pastorals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The unmachined, the men come out of the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still for the most part, living close to the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the roots of the cow-pea, the roots of the jessamine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lazy scorners, the rebels against the wheels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rebels against the steel combustion-chamber</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the half-born new age of engines and metal hands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fighters who fought for themselves in the old clan-fashion.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Army of planters’ sons and rusty poor-whites,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where one man came to war with a haircloth trunk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full of fine shirts and a body-servant to mend them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And another came with a rifle used at King’s Mountain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nothing else but his pants and his sun-cracked hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aristo-democracy armed with a forlorn hope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where a scholar turned the leaves of an Arabic grammar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the campfire-glow, and a drawling mountaineer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Told dirty stories old as the bawdy world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where one of Lee’s sons worked a gun with the Rockbridge Battery</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And two were cavalry generals.</span>
					<span>Praying army,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full of revivals, as full of salty jests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who debated on God and Darwin and Victor Hugo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Decided that evolution might do for Yankees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that Lee never came from anything with a tail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And called yourselves “Lee’s miserables faintin’ ”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the book came out that tickled your sense of romance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Army of improvisators of peanut-coffee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who baked your bread on a ramrod stuck through the dough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swore and laughed and despaired and sang “Lorena,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suffered, died, deserted, fought to the end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sentimental army, touched by “Lorena,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touched by all lace-paper-valentines of sentiment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who wept for the mocking-bird on Hallie’s grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When you had better cause to weep for more private griefs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touched by women and your tradition-idea of them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old, book-fed, half-queen, half-servant idea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>False and true and expiring.</span>
					<span>Starving army,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, after your best was spent and your Spring lay dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet held the intolerable lines of Petersburg</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>With deadly courage.</span>
					<span>You too are a legend now</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the legend has made your fame and has dimmed that fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—The victor strikes and the beaten man goes down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the years pass and the legend covers them both,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beaten cause turns into the magic cause,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The victor has his victory for his pains⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So with you⁠—and the legend has made a stainless host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the dusty columns of footsore men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who found life sweet and didn’t want to be killed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grumbled at officers, grumbled at Governments.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That stainless host you were not. You had your cowards,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your bullies, your fakers, your sneaks, your savages.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You got tired of marching. You cursed the cold and the rain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You cursed the war and the food⁠—and went on till the end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet, there was something in you that matched your fable.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What was it? What do your dim, faint voices say?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Will we ever get home? Will we ever lick them for good?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’ve got to go on and fight till we lick them for good.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They’ve got the guns and the money and lots more men</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But we’ve got to lick them now.</span>
					<span>We’re not fighting for slaves.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most of us never owned slaves and never expect to,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It takes money to buy a slave and we’re most of us poor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we won’t lie down and let the North walk over us</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>About slaves or anything else.</span>
					<span>We don’t know how it started</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they’ve invaded us now and we’re bound to fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till every last damn Yankee goes home and quits.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We used to think we could lick them in one hand’s turn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>We don’t think that any more.</span>
					<span>They keep coming and coming.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We haven’t got guns that shoot as well as their guns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We can’t get clothes that wear as well as their clothes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we’ve got to keep on till they’re licked and we’re independent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>It’s the only thing we can do.</span>
					<span>Though some of us wonder⁠—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some of us try and puzzle the whole thing through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some of us hear about Richmond profiteers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bombproofs who get exempted and eat good dinners,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the rest of it, and say, with a bitter tongue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘This is the rich man’s war and the poor man’s fight.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And more of us, maybe, say that, after a while,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But most of us just keep on till we’re plumb worn out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>We just keep on.</span>
					<span>We’ve got the right men to lead us,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It doesn’t matter how many the Yankees are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marse Robert and Old Jack will take care of that,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’ll have to march like Moses and fight like hell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we’re bound to win unless the two of them die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And God wouldn’t be so mean as to take them both,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>So we just keep on⁠—and keep on⁠—”</span>
					<span>To the Wilderness,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Appomattox, to the end of the dream.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Army of Northern Virginia, army of legend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who were your captains that you could trust them so surely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Who were your battle-flags?</span>
					<span>Call the shapes from the mist,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call the dead men out of the mist and watch them ride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tall the first rider, tall with a laughing mouth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His long black beard is combed like a beauty’s hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His slouch hat plumed with a curled black ostrich-feather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wears gold spurs and sits his horse with the seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Of a horseman born.</span>
					<span>It is Stuart of Laurel Hill,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Beauty” Stuart, the genius of cavalry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reckless, merry, religious, theatrical,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lover of gesture, lover of panache,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all the actor’s grace and the quick, light charm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That makes the women adore him⁠—a wild cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who worships as sober a God as Stonewall Jackson,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Rupert who seldom drinks, very often prays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loves his children, singing, fighting, spurs, and his wife.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweeney his banjo-player follows him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after them troop the young Virginia counties,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Horses and men, Botetort, Halifax,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dinwiddie, Prince Edward, Cumberland, Nottoway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mecklenburg, Berkeley, Augusta, the Marylanders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horsemen never matched till Sheridan came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now the phantom guns creak by. They are Pelham’s guns.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That quiet boy with the veteran mouth is Pelham.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He is twenty-two. He is to fight sixty battles</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And never lose a gun.</span>
					<span>The cannon roll past,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The endless lines of the infantry begin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. P.</abbr> Hill leads the van. He is small and spare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His short, clipped beard is red as his battleshirt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jackson and Lee are to call him in their death-hours.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dutch Longstreet follows, slow, pugnacious and stubborn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard to beat and just as hard to convince,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fine corps commander, good bulldog for holding on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But dangerous when he tries to think for himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thinks for himself too much at Gettysburg,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But before and after he grips with tenacious jaws.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D. H.</abbr> Hill⁠—there is Early and Fitzhugh Lee⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yellow-haired Hood with his wounds and his empty sleeve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leading his Texans, a Viking shape of a man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the thrust and lack of craft of a berserk sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>All lion, none of the fox.</span>
					<span>When he supersedes</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joe Johnston, he is lost, and his army with him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he could lead forlorn hopes with the ghost of Ney.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His bigboned Texans follow him into the mist.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Who follows them?</span>
					<span>These are the Virginia faces,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Virginia speech. It is Jackson’s foot-cavalry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Army of the Valley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is the Stonewall Brigade, it is the streams</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Of the Shenandoah, marching.</span>
					<span>Ewell goes by,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The little woodpecker, bald and quaint of speech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his wooden leg stuck stiffly out from his saddle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He is muttering, “Sir, I’m a nervous Major-General,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whenever an aide rides up from General Jackson</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I fully expect an order to storm the North Pole.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He chuckles and passes, full of crotchets and courage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Living on frumenty for imagined dyspepsia,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ready to storm the North Pole at a Jackson phrase.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the staff⁠—then little Sorrel⁠—and the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Presbyterian figure in the flat cap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throwing his left hand out in the awkward gesture</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That caught the bullet out of the air at Bull Run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awkward, rugged and dour, the belated Ironside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the curious, brilliant streak of the cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That made him quote Mercutio in staff instructions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love lancet windows, the color of passion-flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mexican sun and all fierce, taut-looking fine creatures;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stonewall Jackson, wrapped in his beard and his silence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cromwell-eyed and ready with Cromwell’s short</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bleak remedy for doubters and fools and enemies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard on his followers, harder on his foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An iron sabre vowed to an iron Lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet the only man of those men who pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a strange, secretive grain of harsh poetry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hidden so deep in the stony sides of his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That it shines by flashes only and then is gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>It glitters in his last words.</span>
					<span>He is deeply ambitious,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The skilled man, utterly sure of his own skill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And taking no nonsense about it from the unskilled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But God is the giver of victory and defeat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Lee, on earth, vicegerent under the Lord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes he differs about the mortal plans</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But once the order is given, it is obeyed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We know what he thought about God. One would like to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What he thought of the two together, if he so mingled them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said two things about Lee it is well to recall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he first beheld the man that he served so well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I have never seen such a fine-looking human creature.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, afterwards, at the height of his own fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The skilled man talking of skill, and something more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“General Lee is a phenomenon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He is the only man I would follow blindfold.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think of those two remarks and the man who made them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When you picture Lee as the rigid image in marble.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No man ever knew his own skill better than Jackson</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or was more ready to shatter an empty fame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He passes now in his dusty uniform.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Bible jostles a book of Napoleon’s Maxims</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a magic lemon deep in his saddlebags.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And now at last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes Traveller and his master. Look at them well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horse is an iron-grey, sixteen hands high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Short back, deep chest, strong haunch, flat legs, small head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delicate ear, quick eye, black mane and tail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Wise brain, obedient mouth.</span>
					<span>Such horses are</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The jewels of the horseman’s hands and thighs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They go by the word and hardly need the rein.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They bred such horses in Virginia then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Horses that were remembered after death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And buried not so far from Christian ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That if their sleeping riders should arise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They could not witch them from the earth again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ride a printless course along the grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the old manage and light ease of hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The rider, now.</span>
					<span>He too, is iron-grey,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though the thick hair and thick, blunt-pointed beard</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Have frost in them.</span>
					<span>Broad-foreheaded, deep-eyed,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straight-nosed, sweet-mouthed, firm-lipped, head cleanly set,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He and his horse are matches for the strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grace of proportion that inhabits both.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They carry nothing that is in excess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nothing that is less than symmetry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strength of Jackson is a hammered strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bearing the tool marks still. This strength was shaped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By as hard arts but does not show the toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except as justness, though the toil was there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—And so we get the marble man again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The head on the Greek coin, the idol-image,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shape who stands at Washington’s left hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worshipped, uncomprehended and aloof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A figure lost to flesh and blood and bones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Frozen into a legend out of life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>A blank-verse statue⁠—</span>
					<span>How to humanize</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That solitary gentleness and strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hidden behind the deadly oratory</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of twenty thousand Lee Memorial days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How show, in spite of all the rhetoric,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the sick honey of the speechifiers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proportion, not as something calm congealed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From lack of fire, but ruling such a fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As only such proportion could contain?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The man was loved, the man was idolized,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The man had every just and noble gift.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He took great burdens and he bore them well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Believed in God but did not preach too much,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Believed and followed duty first and last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With marvellous consistency and force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was a great victor, in defeat as great,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more, no less, always himself in both,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could make men die for him but saved his men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whenever he could save them⁠—was most kind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But was not disobeyed⁠—was a good father,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A loving husband, a considerate friend:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had little humor, but enough to play</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mild jokes that never wounded, but had charm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not seek intimates, yet drew men to him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not seek fame, did not protest against it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knew his own value without pomp or jealousy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And died as he preferred to live⁠—sans phrase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With commonsense, tenacity and courage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Greek proportion⁠—and a riddle unread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And everything that we have said is true</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nothing helps us yet to read the man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor will he help us while he has the strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>To keep his heart his own.</span>
					<span>For he will smile</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give you, with unflinching courtesy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prayers, trappings, letters, uniforms and orders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Photographs, kindness, valor and advice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And do it with such grace and gentleness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That you will know you have the whole of him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pinned down, mapped out, easy to understand⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And so you have.</span>
					<span>All things except the heart.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heart he kept himself, that answers all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For here was someone who lived all his life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the most fierce and open light of the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrote letters freely, did not guard his speech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listened and talked with every sort of man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And kept his heart a secret to the end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From all the picklocks of biographers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He was a man, and as a man he knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love, separation, sorrow, joy and death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was a master of the tricks of war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gave great strokes and warded strokes as great.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was the prop and pillar of a State,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The incarnation of a national dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the State fell and the dream dissolved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He must have lived with bitterness itself⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But what his sorrow was and what his joy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how he felt in the expense of strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how his heart contained its bitterness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He will not tell us.</span>
					<span>We can lie about him,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dress up a dummy in his uniform</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And put our words into the dummy’s mouth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say “Here Lee must have thought,” and “There, no doubt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By what we know of him, we may suppose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He felt⁠—this pang or that⁠—” but he remains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond our stagecraft, reticent as ice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reticent as the fire within the stone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet⁠—look at the face again⁠—look at it well⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This man was not repose, this man was act.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This man who murmured “It is well that war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should be so terrible, if it were not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We might become too fond of it⁠—” and showed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself, for once, completely as he lived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the laconic balance of that phrase;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This man could reason, but he was a fighter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Skillful in every weapon of defence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But never defending when he could assault,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taking enormous risks again and again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never retreating while he still could strike,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dividing a weak force on dangerous ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And joining it again to beat a strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mocking at chance and all the odds of war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With acts that looked like hairbreadth recklessness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—We do not call them reckless, since they won.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We do not see him reckless for the calm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proportion that controlled the recklessness⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that attacking quality was there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was not mild with life or drugged with justice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gripped life like a wrestler with a bull,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impetuously. It did not come to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While he stood waiting in a famous cloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He went to it and took it by both horns</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And threw it down.</span>
					<span>Oh, he could bear the shifts</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of time and play the bitter loser’s game,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slow, unflinching chess of fortitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But while he had an opening for attack</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He would attack with every ounce of strength.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His heart was not a stone but trumpet-shaped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a long challenge blew an anger through it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That was more dread for being musical</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>First, last, and to the end.</span>
					<span>Again he said</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A curious thing to life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“I’m always wanting something.”</span>
					<span>The brief phrase</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slides past us, hardly grasped in the smooth flow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the well-balanced, mildly-humorous prose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That goes along to talk of cats and duties,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maxims of conduct, farming and poor bachelors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But for a second there, the marble cracked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a strange man we never saw before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Showed us the face he never showed the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wanted something⁠—not the general</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who wanted shoes and food for ragged men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not the good father wanting for his children,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The patriot wanting victory⁠—all the Lees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom all the world could see and recognize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hang with gilded laurels⁠—but the man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who had, you’d say, all things that life can give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except the last success⁠—and had, for that,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such glamor as can wear sheer triumph out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proportion’s son and Duty’s eldest sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the calm mask who⁠—wanted something still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Somewhere, somehow and always.</span>
					<span>Picklock biographers,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What could he want that he had never had?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He only said it once⁠—the marble closed⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was a man enclosed within that image.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was a force that tried Proportion’s rule</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And died without a legend or a cue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bring it back. The shadow-Lees still live.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the first-person and the singular Lee?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The ant finds kingdoms in a foot of ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But earth’s too small for something in our earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’ll make a new earth from the summer’s cloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>From the pure summer’s cloud.</span>
					<span>It was not that,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was not God or love or mortal fame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was not anything he left undone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—What does Proportion want that it can lack?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—What does the ultimate hunger of the flesh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Want from the sky more than a sky of air?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He wanted something. That must be enough.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now he rides Traveller back into the mist.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Continual guns, be silent for a moment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be silent, now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We know your thirst. We hear the roll of your wheels</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crushing down tangled June,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Virginia June,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With tires of iron, with heavy caissons creaking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crushing down maidenhair and wilderness-seal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scaring the rabbit and the possum-children,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scaring the redbird and the mockingbird</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As McClellan’s army moves forward.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We know your bloody thirst so soon to be slaked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the red burst-grape juices.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now, we would have you silent, a little moment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We would have you hold your peace and point at the moon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For when you speak, we can hear no sound but your sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we would hear the voices of men and women</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a little while.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Jake Diefer, the barrel-chested Pennsylvanian,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shippy, the little man with the sharp rat-eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Luke Breckenridge, the gawky boy from the hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clay Wingate, Melora Vilas, Sally Dupré,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slaves in the cabins, ragged Spade in the woods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We have lost these creatures under a falling hammer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We must look for them now, again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Jake Diefer is with the assault that comes from the ships,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He has marched, he has fought at Fair Oaks, but he looks the same:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A slow-thought-chewing Clydesdale horse of a man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who doesn’t think much of the way that they farm down here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun may be good, if you like that sort of sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the barns and the fields are different, they don’t look right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>They don’t look like Pennsylvania.</span>
					<span>He spits and wonders.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whenever he can, he reads a short, crumpled letter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tries to puzzle out from the round, stiff writing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>How things are back on the farm.</span>
					<span>The boy’s a good boy</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the boy can’t do it all, or the woman either.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knows too much about weather and harvest-hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—It’s all right fighting the Rebels to save the Union</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they ought to get through with it quicker, now they’ve begun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They don’t take the way the crops are into account,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You can’t go off and leave a farm like a store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you can’t expect a boy to know everything,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Or a hired man. No, sir.</span>
					<span>He walks along like an ox.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—He’d like to see the boy and the woman again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eat pancakes and sleep in a bed and look at the hay⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This business comes first but after it’s finished up⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He can’t say he’s bothered exactly most of the time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weather bothers him more than anything.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knows it’s not the same sort of weather down here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But every day when he wakes, he looks at the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tries to figure out what it’s like back home.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Shippy, the little man with the sharp rat-eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Creeps into an old house in beleaguered Richmond</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And meets a woman dressed in severe black silk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a gentle voice, soft delicate useless hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A calm, smooth, faded, handsome mask of a face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And an incredible secret under her brooches.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You would picture her with ivory crochet-needles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Demurely tatting, demurely singing mild hymns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To an old melodeon before a blurred mirror.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She is to live in Richmond throughout the war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Union spy, never caught, never once suspected,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when she dies, she dies with a shut prim mouth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Locked on her mystery.</span>
					<span>Shippy is afraid.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She gives him instructions, he tries to remember them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But his hands are sweating, his eyes creep around the floor.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He is afraid of the rustle of the black silk.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wishes he were back in Pollet’s Hotel</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>With Sophy, the chambermaid.</span>
					<span>The woman talks</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he listens, while the woman looks through and through him,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Melora Vilas, rising by crack of dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked at herself in the bottom of her tin basin</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And wished that she had a mirror.</span>
					<span>She thought dully,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“He’s been gone two months. I can’t get used to it yet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ve got to get used to it. Maybe I’ll die instead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, I’d know if he’d died.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sally Dupré was tired of scraping lint</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But her hands kept on. The hours, sunbonneted women,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passed and passed. “If he ever comes back to me!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She finished her scraping and wondered how to make coffee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of willow-bark and life from a barren stick.⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spade the fugitive stared at the bleak North Star.⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Luke Breckenridge, on picket out in the woods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remembered a chambermaid at Pollet’s Hotel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wanted a fight. He hadn’t been lucky, of late.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jim, his cousin, was lucky, out in the West,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Riding a horse and capturing Yankee scouts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But his winter here had been nothing but work and mud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’d nearly got courtmartialed a dozen times,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Thought they knew how he could shoot.</span>
					<span>The chambermaid’s name</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was Sophy. She was little and scared and thin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he liked her looks and he liked the size of her eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’d like to feed her up and see how she looked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If they ever got through with fighting the Yankees here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Yankees weren’t all Kelceys. He knew that now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he always looked for Kelceys whenever he fought.⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clay Wingate slept in his cloak and dreamed of a girl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Sally’s face and Lucy Weatherby’s mouth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And waked again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To know today there would be continual guns.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Continual guns, silent so brief a moment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak again, now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For now your ignorance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drowns out the little voices of human creatures.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jackson slips from the Valley where he has played</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dazzling game against Banks and Shield and Frémont</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And threatened the chess-game-king of Washington</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till strong pieces meant to join in McClellan’s game</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Are held to defend that king.</span>
					<span>And now the two,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jackson and Lee, strike hard for Seven Days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the host come up from its ships, come up from the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take the city set on a deck of land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the deck is soaked and red with a bloody juice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And the host goes back.</span>
					<span>You can read in the histories</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How the issue wavered, the fog of tiny events,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How here, at one dot, McClellan might have wrung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A victory, perhaps, with his larger force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there, on the other hand, played canny and well;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How Jackson, for once, moved slowly, how Porter held,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the bitter, exhausted wrestling of Malvern Hill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>What we know is this.</span>
					<span>The host from the ships went back,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurt but not broken, hammered but undestroyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To find a new base far up the crook of the James</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And rest there, panting.</span>
					<span>Lincoln and Halleck come.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gaunt, plain face is deeper furrowed than ever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eyes are strained with looking at books of tactics</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And trying to understand.</span>
					<span>There is so much</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For one man to understand, so many lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So much half-truth, so many counselling voices,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So much death to be sown and reaped and still no end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dead of the Seven Days. The four months dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boy who used to play with a doll named Jack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was a bright boy as boys are reckoned and now is dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The doll named Jack was sometimes a Union soldier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Sometimes a spy.</span>
					<span>The boy and his brother held</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A funeral in the White House flower-beds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After suitably executing the doll named Jack</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But then they thought of a different twist to the game.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The gaunt man signed a paper.</span>
					<span>“The doll named Jack</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is pardoned. By order of the President.</span>
				<br/>
				<span><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Lincoln.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Jack was held in honor awhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But next day the boy and his brother forgot the pardon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the doll named Jack was shot and buried once more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>So much death to be sown and reaped.</span>
					<span>So much death to be sown</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>By one no sower of deaths.</span>
					<span>And still no end.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The council is held. The chiefs and captains debate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>McClellan clings to his plan of storming the deck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the water ways. He is cool now. He argues well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He has written Lincoln “From the brink of eternity”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—A strained, high-flown, remarkable speech of a letter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the sort so many have written and still will write⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telling how well he has done in saving his army,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No thanks to the Government, or to anything else</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the pith of his fighting-men and his own craft.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lincoln reads and pockets the speech and thanks him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There had been craft and courage in that retreat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And much was due to McClellan.</span>
					<span>The others speak.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some corps commanders agree and some demur,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Peninsula-stroke has failed and will fail again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Elbow-rubbing Halleck, newly-made chief of staff,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called “Old Brains,” for reasons that history</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still tries to fathom, demurs. He urges withdrawal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Washington must be defended first and last⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withdraw the army and put it in front of Washington.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lincoln listens to all as he tries to sift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mustardseed from the twenty barrels of chaff</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>With patient hands.</span>
					<span>There has been a growth in the man,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tempering of will in these trotting months</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose strong hoofs striking have scarred him again and again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He still rules more by the rein than by whip or spur</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the reins are fast in his hands and the horses know it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He no longer says “I think,” but “I have decided.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And takes the strength and the burden of such decision</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>For good or bad on himself.</span>
					<span>He will bear all things</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But lack of faith in the Union and that not once.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now at last he decides to recall McClellan’s army</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>For right or wrong.</span>
					<span>We see the completed thing,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long afterward, knowing all that was still to come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And say “He was wrong.”</span>
					<span>He saw the incomplete,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The difficult chance that might turn a dozen ways</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And so decided.</span>
					<span>Be it so. He was wrong.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So the deck is cleared and the host goes back to its ships.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bells in the Richmond churches, clanging for Sunday,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clang as if silver were mixed in their sweet bell-metal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dark cloud lifts, the girls wear flowers again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Virginia June,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crushed under cannon, under the cannon ruts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trampled grass lifts up its little green guidons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The honeysuckle and the eglantine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blow on their tiny trumpets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blow out “Dixie,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blow out “Lorena,” blow the “Bonnie Blue Flag”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—There are many dead, there are many too many dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hospitals are crowded with broken dolls⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But cotton has won again, cotton is haughty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cotton is mounting again to a sleepy throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wheat and iron recoil from the fields of cotton,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sweet grass grows over them, the cotton blows over them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One more battle and free, free, free forever.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cotton moves North in a wave, in a white-crested</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wave of puff-blossoms⁠—in a long grey coil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of marching men with tongues as dry as cotton.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cotton and honeysuckle and eglantine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Move North in a drenching wave of blossom and guns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wash out wheat and iron forever and ever.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There will be other waves that set toward the North,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There will be a high tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But this is the high hour.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jackson has still three hammerstrokes to strike,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lee is still master of the attacking sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stuart still carries his black feather high.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put silver in your bell-metal, Richmond bells,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wave of the cotton goes North to your sweet ringing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The first great raiding wave of the Southern dream.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Jack Ellyat, in prison deep in the South,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gaunt, bearded, dirty old man with the captive eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay on his back and stared at the flies on the wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tried to remember, through an indifferent mist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A green place lost in the woods and a herd of black swine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They came and went and the mist moved round them again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mist was not death. He was used to death by now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the mist still puzzled him, sometimes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was curious⁠—being so weak and yet, used to death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When you were strong, you thought of death as a strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rider on a black horse, perhaps, or at least</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As some strong creature, dreadful because so strong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when you were weak and lived in a place like this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Things changed. There was nothing strong about death any more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was only the gnawed rat-bone on the dirty floor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That you stumbled across and hardly bothered to curse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>That was all.</span>
					<span>The two Michigan men had died last night.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Ohio brothers were going to die this week,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You got pretty soon so you knew when people would die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It passed the time as well as carving bone-rings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Playing checkers with straws or learning Italian nouns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the lanky schoolteacher-sergeant from Vermont.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somewhere, sometime, in a tent, by a red loud noise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under a dirty coat and a slab of tobacco,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had lost a piece of himself, a piece of life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He couldn’t die till he got that piece of him back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And felt its ragged edges fit in his heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or so he thought. Sometimes, when he slept, he felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if he were getting it back⁠—but most of the time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was only the mist and counting the flies that bothered him.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He heard a footstep near him and turned his head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“Hello, Charley,” he said, “Where you been?”</span>
					<span>Bailey’s face looked strange,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The red, hot face of a hurt and angry boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Out hearing the Rebs,” he said. He spat on the floor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And broke into long, blue curses. When he was through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Did you hear them?” he asked. Jack Ellyat tried to remember</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A gnat-noise buzzing the mist. “I guess so,” he said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What was it? Two-bottle Ed on another tear?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hell,” said Bailey. “They cheered. They’ve licked us again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The news just come. It happened back at Bull Run.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“You’re crazy,” said Ellyat. “That was the start of the war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“I was in that one.”</span>
					<span>“Oh, don’t be a fool,” said Bailey,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“They licked us again, I tell you, the same old place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Pope’s army’s ruined.”</span>
					<span>“Who’s he?” said Ellyat wearily.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Aw, we had him out West⁠—he’s God Almighty’s pet horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He came East and told all the papers how good he was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Headquarters in the saddle’!” Bailey snickered.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Well, they snaffled his saddle and blame near snaffled him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jackson and Lee⁠—anyhow they licked us again.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“What about Little Mac?”</span>
					<span>“Well, Gawd knows what’s happened to <em>him</em>,”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said Bailey, flatly, “Maybe he’s captured, too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maybe they captured Old Abe and everyone else.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I don’t know⁠—you can’t tell from those lyin’ Rebs.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There was a silence. Ellyat lay on his back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And watched the flies on the wall for quite a long time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I wish I had a real newspaper,” said Bailey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Not one of your Richmond wipers. By God, you know, Jack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When we get back home, I’ll read a newspaper, sometimes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I never was much at readin’ the newspaper</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I’d like to read one now, say once in a while.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Ellyat laughed.</span>
					<span>“You know, Charley,” he said at last.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“We’ve got to get out of this place.”</span>
					<span>Bailey joined in the laugh.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then he stopped and stared at the other with anxious eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“You don’t look crazy,” he said, “Stop countin’ those flies.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Ellyat raised himself on one arm.</span>
					<span>“No, honest, Charley,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I mean it, damn it. We’ve got to get out of here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>I know we can’t but we’ve got to.⁠ ⁠…”</span>
					<span>He swallowed dryly.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Look here⁠—” he said, “It just came over me then.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ve got a girl and she doesn’t know where I am.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I left her back in a tent⁠—no, that wasn’t a girl⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you say we got licked again. But that’s just it, Charley.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We get licked too much. We’ve got to get out of here.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He sank back to the floor and shut his ghost-ridden eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bailey regarded him for a long, numb moment.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“You couldn’t walk a mile and a half,” he muttered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And, by God, I couldn’t carry you twenty feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, by God, if we could, there ain’t no way to get out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But all the same⁠—”</span>
					<span>“If there was any use tryin’,”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said, half-pleadingly, half-defiantly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I tell you, Jack, if there was any use tryin’⁠—”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stopped. Ellyat’s eyes were shut. He rose with great care.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I’ll get you some water,” he muttered. “No, let you sleep.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sat down again and stared at the sleeping face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“He looks bad,” he thought. “I guess I look bad myself.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I guess the kid’s goin’ to die if we don’t get out.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I guess we’re both goin’ to die. I don’t see why not.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He looked up at the flies on the ceiling and shook his fist.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Listen, you dirty Rebs,” he said, under his breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Flap your goddam wings⁠—we’re goin’ to get out of here!”</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>John Brown lies dead in his grave and does not stir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is nearly three years since he died and he does not stir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is no sound in his bones but the sound of armies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that is an old sound.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He walks, you will say, he walks in front of the armies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A straggler met him, going along to Manassas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his gun on his shoulder, his phantom-sons at heel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyes like misty coals.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A dead man saw him striding at Seven Pines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bullets whistling through him like a torn flag,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A madman saw him whetting a sword on a Bible,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cloud above Malvern Hill.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But these are all lies. He slumbers. He does not stir.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spring rains and the winter snows on his slumber</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the bones of his flesh breed armies and yet more armies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he himself does not stir.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It will take more than cannon to shake his fortress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His song is alive and throbs in the tramp of the columns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His song is smoke blown out of the mouth of a cannon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But his song and he are two.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The South goes ever forward, the slave is not free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great stone gate of the Union crumbles and totters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cotton-blossoms are pushing the blocks apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The roots of cotton grow in the crevices,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(John Brown’s body lies a-mouldering in the grave.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon the fight will be over, the slaves will be slaves forever.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(John Brown’s body lies a-mouldering in the grave.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You did not fight for the Union or wish it well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You fought for the single dream of a man unchained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And God’s great chariot rolling. You fought like the thrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stone, but the fighters have forgotten your dream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(John Brown’s body lies a-mouldering in the grave.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You fought for a people you did not comprehend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a symbol chained by a symbol in your own mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, unless you arise, that people will not be free.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are there no seeds of thunder left in your bones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except to breed useless armies?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(John Brown’s body lies a-mouldering in the grave.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arise, John Brown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call up your sons from the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In smoky wreaths, call up your sons to heel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call up the clumsy country boys you armed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With crazy pikes and a fantastic mind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call up the American names,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kagi, the self-taught scholar, quiet and cool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stevens, the cashiered soldier, bawling his song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dangerfield Newby, the freed Scotch-mulatto,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watson and Oliver Brown and all the hard-dying.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call up the slug-riddled dead of Harper’s Ferry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cast them down the wind on a raid again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is the dark hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is the ebb-tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is the sunset, this is the defeat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cotton-blossoms are growing up to the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great stone gate of the Union sinks beneath them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And under the giant blossoms lies Egypt’s land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dark river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ground of bondage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chained men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the great gate falls, the cotton grows over your dream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Find your heart, John Brown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(A-mouldering in the grave.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call your sons and get your pikes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(A-mouldering in the grave.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your song goes on, but the slave is still a slave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all Egypt’s land rides Northward while you moulder in the grave!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rise up, John Brown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(A-mouldering in the grave.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go down, John Brown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Against all Egypt’s land)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go down, John Brown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go down, John Brown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go down, John Brown, and set that people free!</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
