<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>By Pittsburg Landing, the turbid Tennessee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sucks against black, soaked spiles with soil-colored waters.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That country is huge and disorderly, even now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—This is Ellyat’s tune, this is no tune but his⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Country of muddy rivers, sombre and swollen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Country of bronze wild turkeys and catfish-fries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brushpile landings going back to the brush.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A province of mush and milk, a half-cleared forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A speckled guinea-cock that never was cooped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ran away to grow his spurs by himself.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither North nor South, but crunching a root of its own</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between strong teeth⁠—perhaps a wild-onion-root,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perhaps a white stalk of arbutus, hardier there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than any phantom-arbutus of Eastern Springs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mudsill man with the river-wash in his ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Munching the coarse, good meal of a johnny-cake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hot from the hob⁠—even now it tastes of the brush,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wilderness, the big lost star in the pines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brown river-dirt, the perpetual river-sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In spite of the sidewalks, in spite of the trolley-cars.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No trolley-car-bell can drown that river-sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or take the loneliness out of the lost moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The night too big for a man, too lonesome and wide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vastness has been netted in railroad tracks</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But it is still vast, uneasy.</span>
					<span>And when the brief</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Screech of the railway-whistle stabs at the trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That grow so thick, so unplanned, so untidily strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On either side of the two planned ribs of steel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ghost-steamboats answer it from the sucking brown water.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In Sixty-two, it was shaggy with wilderness still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For stretches and stretches of close-packed undergrowth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wild as a muskrat, ignorant of the axe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretches and stretches where roughly-chinked log-cabins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two shouts and a holler away from the nearest neighbors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood in a wisp of open. All night long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cabin-people heard the chant of the trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The forest, hewn away from the painful clearing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a day or a year, with sweat and back-breaking toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But waiting to come back, to crush the crude house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the planted space with vines and trailers of green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To quench the fire on the hearth with running green saps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a chant of green, with tiny green tendrils curling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—This is Ellyat’s tune, this is no tune but his⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The railway-train goes by with a shrill, proud scream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the woman comes to the door in a butternut dress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hair tousled up in a knot on the back of her head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>A barefoot child at her skirt.</span>
					<span>The train goes by.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They watch it with a slow wonder that is not pathos</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor heroism but merely a slow wonder.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Jack Ellyat, in camp above Pittsburg Landing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speck in Grant’s Army of the Tennessee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thought of old fences in Connecticut</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>With a homesick mind.</span>
					<span>This country was too new,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too stragglingly-unplanned, too muddy with great,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uncomfortable floods, too roughly cut</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a broad hatchet out of a hard tree.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It had seemed fine when he was mustered out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After Bull Run, to wear a veteran air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tell pink Ellen Baker about war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how, as soon as he could re-enlist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’d do it where he got a chance to fight⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wet mouth of tears⁠—he hadn’t wanted to kiss her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At first, but it was easier later on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why had he ever gone out to Chicago?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why had he ever heard that shallow band</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whanging its brass along a Western street</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And run to sign the muster-roll again?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why had he ever talked about Bull Run</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To these green, husky boys from Illinois</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Iowa, whose slang was different slang,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who called suspenders galluses and swore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the sharp pops of a mule-driver’s whip?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bull Run⁠—it had impressed them for a week</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But then they started to call him “Bull Run Jack.”⁠ ⁠…</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Henry Fairfield marching along with his sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the old company marching after him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back in McClellan’s army, back by the known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Potomac, back in the safe and friendly East;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the papers telling how brave they were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how, as soon as the roads dried up in the spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The little Napoleon” would hammer the South to bits</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>With a blue thunderbolt.</span>
					<span>And here he was</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lost pea, spilt at random in a lost war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Tennessee war that had no <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Tribunes</i> or polish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where he was the only Easterner in the whole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strange-swearing regiment of Illinois farmers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alien as Rebels, and rough as all outdoors.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He wanted to get transferred, he wanted to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back with the company, back with the Eastern voices,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back where nobody called him “Bull Run Jack”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And snickered at him for shaving every two days.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’d written about it and Father knew a congressman</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But nothing would happen⁠—he’d never get away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’d stay being Bull Run Jack till the end of the war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And march through acres of hostile Tennessee mud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till his legs dropped off, and never get to be Corporal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was sick of the war and the mud and the Western faces.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hated the sight of his Illinois uniform.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was sorry for himself. He felt with a vague</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soft blur of self-pity that he was really quite brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if people only knew, they’d do something about it.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This is Ellyat’s tune, this is no tune but his.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nine months have passed since McDowell reddened Bull Run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nine strong-hoofed months, but they have meant little to Ellyat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What means the noise of the wind to the dust in the wind?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the wind calls strange things out, calls strange men out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dozen pictures flash in front of the eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And are gone in a flash⁠—</span>
					<span>rough-bearded Tecumseh Sherman,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who had tried most things, but being cursed with a taste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For honesty, had found small luck in his stars;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ex-soldier, banker, lawyer, each in its turn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ex-head of a Southern military-school,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Untidy ex-president of a little horse-railroad;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Talkative, nervous, salty, Scotch-Irish fighter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High-strung, quick-tempered, essentially modern-minded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stamping the length of the dusty corridors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a Western hotel with a dead cigar in his teeth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Talking the war to himself, till the word goes round</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The new general is crazy⁠—</span>
					<span>neat, handsome McClellan,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ex-railroad president too, but a better railroad;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fortunate youth, the highly-modern boy-wonder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The snapping-eyed, brisk banner-salesman of war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all the salesman’s gifts and the salesman’s ego;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great organizer, with that magnetic spark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That pulls the heart from the crowd⁠—and all of it spoiled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the Napoleon-complex that haunts such men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There never has been a young banner-salesman yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That did not dream of a certain little cocked-hat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And feel it fit. McClellan felt that it fitted.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—After a year and a day, the auditors come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dry auditors, going over the books of the company,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sad auditors, with groups of red and black figures</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That are not moved by a dream of precious cocked hats.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after the auditors go, the board of directors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Decides, with a sigh, to do without banner-salesmen.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is safer to dream of a rusty Lincoln stovepipe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>That dream has more patience in it.</span>
					<span>And yet, years later,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meeting the banner-salesman in some cheap street</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the faded clippings of old success in his pocket,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One cannot help feeling sorry for the cocked hat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So briefly worn in a dream of luck and the ego.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One cannot help feeling sorry for George McClellan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He should have been a hero by every rule.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He looked the part⁠—he could have acted the part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Word perfectly. He looked like an empire-maker.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But so few empire-makers have looked the part.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fate has a way of picking unlikely material,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greasy-haired second lieutenants of French artillery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bald-headed, dubious, Roman rake-politicians.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her stiff hands were busy now with an odd piece of wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometime Westpointer, by accident more than choice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometime brevet-captain in the old Fourth Infantry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mentioned in Mexican orders for gallant service</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, six years later, forced to resign from the Army</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without enough money to pay for a stateroom home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned farmer on Hardscrabble Farm, turned bill-collector,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned clerk in the country-store that his brothers ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eldest-born of the lot, but the family-failure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unloading frozen hides from a farmer’s sleigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With stoop-shouldered strength, whittling beside the stove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now and then turning to whiskey to take the sting</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>From winter and certain memories.</span>
					<span>It didn’t take much.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A glass or two would thicken the dogged tongue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flush the fair skin beneath the ragged brown beard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poor and shabby⁠—old “Cap” Grant of Galena,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who should have amounted to something but hadn’t so far</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Though he worked hard and was honest.</span>
					<span>A middle-aged clerk,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stumpy, mute man in a faded army overcoat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who wrote the War Department after Fort Sumter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Offering them such service as he could give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saying he thought that he was fit to command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As much as a regiment, but getting no answer.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So many letters come to a War Department,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One can hardly bother the clerks to answer them all⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then a Volunteer colonel, drilling recruits with a stick,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A red bandanna instead of an officer’s sash;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A brigadier-general, one of thirty-seven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snubbed by Halleck and slighted by fussy Frémont;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then the frozen February gale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over Fort Henry and Fort Donelson,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gunboats on the cold river⁠—the brief siege⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Unconditional surrender”⁠—and the newspapers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Major-General Grant, with his new twin-stars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, oddly, cared so little for reading newspapers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though Jesse Grant wrote dozens of letters to them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pointing out all the wonders his son had done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wringing one dogged letter from that same son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That should have squelched anybody but Jesse Grant.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It did not squelch him. He was a business man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now Ulysses had astonished Galena</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By turning out to be somebody after all;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses’ old father was going to see him respected</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, incidentally, try to wangle a contract</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For army-harness and boom the family tannery.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was a great surprise when Ulysses refused,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The boy was so stubborn about it.</span>
					<span>And everywhere</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were business-people, picking up contraband cotton,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Picking up army-contracts, picking up shoddy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Picking up shoes and blankets, picking up wagons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Businesslike robins, picking up juicy earthworms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Picking up gold all over Tom-Tiddler’s Ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And Ulysses wouldn’t see it.</span>
					<span>Few people have been</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More purely Yankee, in essence, than Jesse Grant.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>More pictures⁠—Jefferson Davis, in dripping Spring rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reading a chilly inauguration-address</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To an unstirred crowd. He is really President now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyes are more tired, his temper beginning to fray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A British steamer in the Bahama Channel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stopped by a Captain Wilkes and a Union cruiser.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They take two men, and let the steamer puff on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—And light a long hissing fuse that for a month</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nearly brings war with England. Lincoln and Seward</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stamp out the fuse, and let the Confederates go⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wooden frigates at anchor in Hampton Roads</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burning and sinking with tattered banners apeak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the strange new, armadillo-bite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of something plated with iron that yet can float,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Merrimac</i>⁠—and all Washington and the North</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a twenty-four-hours’ panic⁠—then, next day⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Lincoln stares from the window of the White House</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the sooty sign in the sky that means defeat⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The armadillo, smoking back in her pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To crunch up another meal of weak wooden ships,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is beaten off by another leaky prodigy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tin-can cylinder on a floating shingle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Monitor</i>⁠—the first fight of iron-clads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sinking of all the world’s old sea-bitten names,</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Temeraire</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Victory</i>, and <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Constellation</i>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Serapis</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Bon Homme Richard</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Golden Hind</i>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Galleys of Antony, galleys of Carthage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Galleons with gilded Virgins, galleasses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Viking long-serpents, siren-haunted galliots,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Argos and argosies and the Achaean pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moving to sea in one long wooden wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind the huge ghost-flagship of the Ark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In such a swelling cloud of phantom sail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They whitened Ocean⁠—going down by the head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Green water seeping through the battened ports,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spreading along the scrubbed and famous decks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Going down⁠—going down⁠—going down⁠—to mermaid-pools,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Fiddler’s Green⁠—to the dim barnacle-thrones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Davy Jones drinks everlasting rum</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the sea-horses of his sunken dreams.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But this is Ellyat’s tune⁠—and if the new</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Army of the Potomac stands astrain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To end Secession with its “little Napoleon.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If Lee is just about to find his hour;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If, among many mirrors and gilt chairs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the flare of the gas-chandeliers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sallow-faced and puffy Emperor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With waxed mustachios and a slick goatee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave various Southern accents, talking French,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evasive answers and no definite help,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ready enough to recognize the South</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If he were sure of profit in the scheme</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not yet finding such a profit sure;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If in the foggy streets of Westminster,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The salty streets of Liverpool and Hull,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The same mole-struggle in the dark went on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between Confederate and Unionist⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Times</i> raved at the North⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gladstone thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>England might recognize the South next year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Palmerston played such a tangled game</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is illegible yet⁠—and Henry Adams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Added one more doubt to his education</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By writing propaganda for the North,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>It is all mist to Ellyat.</span>
					<span>And when he sleeps,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He does not dream of Grant or Lee or Lincoln.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He only dreams that he is back at home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a heroic wound that does not hurt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A uniform that never stings with lice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a sword like Henry Fairfield’s to show Ellen Baker.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>As far as the maps and the blocks on the maps have meaning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The situation is this.</span>
					<span>A wide Western river,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little lost landing, with a steamboat-store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A post office where the roads from the landings meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A plank church three miles inland called Shiloh Chapel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An undulating and broken table-land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roughed into a triangle by bordering creeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each side of the triangle runs about four miles long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, scattered in camps from the tip of the triangle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the base at the landing, are thirty-three thousand men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some fairly seasoned in war, but many green sticks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Grant’s Army of the Tennessee.</span>
					<span>Down the river</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Don Carlos Buell has twenty-five thousand more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>In the Army of the Ohio.</span>
					<span>Opposing these</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are Albert Sidney Johnston and Beauregard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With something like forty-thousand butternut fighters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Including a martial bishop.</span>
					<span>Johnston plans</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To smash Grant’s army to bits, before Buell can join it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And water his wagon-trains in the Tennessee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He has sneaked his army along through wilderness roads</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till now they are only a mile and a half away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Tonight from the Union lines.</span>
					<span>He is tall and active.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light brown hair streaked with grey feathers, blue claymore eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That get steel shadows in battle, a face like Hamilton’s,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old Westpointer, old cavalry-colonel, well-schooled in war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lincoln offered to make him a major-general</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rumor says that he could have had the command</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Of the Union armies, once.</span>
					<span>But he resigned</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And later, went with his State. It is hard to say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>What he might have been.</span>
					<span>They called him the “<i xml:lang="fr">preux chevalier</i>”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At times, as they called and were to call many others</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With that Waverley-streak that was so strong in the South.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They also called him one of Davis’s pets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of the tin Westpointers that Davis favored</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above good politicians and courtesy colonels.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Richmond <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Enquirer</i> didn’t think so much of him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>His soldiers thought rather more.</span>
					<span>Only this can be said.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He caught Grant napping in some strange flaw of skill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which happened once and did not happen again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drove his unprepared, unwatchful brigades</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Back almost into the river.</span>
					<span>And in the heat</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of seeing his lines go forward, he bled to death</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>From a wound that should not have been mortal.</span>
					<span>After which,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the broken Union stragglers under the bluff</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were still howling that they were beaten, Buell came up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lew Wallace came up, the knife half-sunk in the wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was not thrust home, the night fell, the battle lagged.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bulldog got the bone in his teeth again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And next day, reinforced, beat Beauregard back</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And counted a Union victory.</span>
					<span>In the books</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both sides claim victory on one day or the other</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And both claims seem valid enough.</span>
					<span>It only remains</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take the verdict of the various dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this somewhat indecisive meeting of blocks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There were thirty-five hundred dead when the blocks had met.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, being dead, their verdict is out of court.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They cannot puzzle the books with their testimony.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now, though, it is only the evening before the day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Johnston and Beauregard meet with their corps-commanders</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the wagon-cut Pittsburg road. The march has been slow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The marching men have been noisy and hard to manage.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By every rule of war, Grant must have been warned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long before now, and is planning an ambush for them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are being marched into an open Union trap.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Beauregard thinks and says⁠—and is perfectly right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>According to rules. There is only one difficulty.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>There is no ambush.</span>
					<span>Sherman has just reported</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The presence of enemy troops in front of his lines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But says he expects nothing more than some picket-firing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Grant that evening telegraphs General Halleck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I have scarcely the faintest idea of an attack.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So much for the generals. Beauregard makes his point</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And is overruled.</span>
					<span>The April night comes down.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The butternut men try to get some sleep while they can.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are to be up and fighting by five in the morning.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Jack Ellyat, least of any, expected attack.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He woke about five with a dazzle struck in his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where a long dawn-ray slid through a crack in the tent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He cursed at the ray and tried to go back to sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he couldn’t do it, although he was tired enough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something ate at his mind as soon as he wakened</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And kept on eating.</span>
					<span>This morning was Sunday morning.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bells would be jangling for church back home, pretty soon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The girls would be going to church in white Sunday dresses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, it was too early for that⁠—they’d be muffled up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In coats and galoshes. Their cheeks would be pink as apples.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wanted to see a girl who washed her hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not a flat old woman sucking a yellow snuffstick</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or one of the girls in the dirty blue silk wrappers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With flags on their garters. He wanted to see a girl.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He wondered idly about the flags on the garters.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did they change them to Rebel flags when the Rebels came?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some poor whore down the river had had herself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tattoed with a Secesh flag. She was patriotic.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She cried so hard when the Union troops were landed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the madam had to hide her down in the cellar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He must be bad to be thinking of things like that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Sunday morning. He’d better go to church</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If they had any kind of church, and make up for it⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O frosty churchbells jangling across the thin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crust of packed frost, under Connecticut sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put snow on my tongue, and the grey, cool flower of rain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had to get up. He couldn’t lie here and listen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Bailey and the rest of them, snoring away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His throat was dry. He needed a drink of water</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not from a muddy river⁠—put rain on my tongue!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Souse me with chilly, sweet flaws of Puritan rain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He started to put on his boots, looking over at Bailey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bailey was bearded, Bailey was thirty-two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bailey had been a teamster and was a corporal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The waking Bailey looked like a stupid horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sleeping Bailey looked like a dirty sack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bailey called him “Colonel” and didn’t mean it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bailey had had him tossed in a blanket once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bailey had told the tale of the tattooed whore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somehow he hated Bailey worse than the rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He managed to leave the tent without waking Bailey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was very early still. The sun was just up.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fair sky, a very fair day. The air still held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That bloom which is not the bloom on apple or peach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the bloom on a fruit made up of pure water and light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The freshness of dawn, still trembling, being new-born.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He sucked at it gratefully.</span>
					<span>The camp was asleep.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that length of tents still asleep. He could see through the tents.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He could see all those sleeping, rough, lousy, detested men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laden with sleep as with soft leaden burdens laden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Movelessly lying between the brown fawns of sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like infants nuzzled against the flanks of a doe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In quietness slumbering, in a warm quietness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While sleep looked at them with her fawn’s agate eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And would not wake them yet.</span>
					<span>And he was alone,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for a moment, could see this, and see them so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, being free, stand alone, and so being free</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To love or hate, do neither, but merely stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above them like sleep and see them with untouched eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a while they would wake, and he would hate them again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now he was asleep. He was the sun on the coat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the halted fawn at the green edge of the wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Staring at morning.</span>
					<span>He could not hate them yet.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Somebody near by, in the woods, took a heap of dry sticks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And began to break them quickly, first one by one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then a dozen together, then hard-cracking axe-helves breaking.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ellyat was running. His mouth felt stiff with loud words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though he heard no sound from his mouth. He could see the white</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fine pine-splinters flying from those invisible axe-helves.⁠ ⁠…</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For a minute all of them were tangled together</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the bucking tent like fish in a canvas scoop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then they were out of it somehow⁠—falling in line⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bailey’s hair looked angry and sleepy. The officers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were yelling the usual things that officers yelled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was a surprise. They were going to be licked again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It did not matter yet. It would matter soon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bailey had lost his blouse and his pants weren’t buttoned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He meant to tell Bailey about it. There wasn’t time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyes felt bald as glass but that was because</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He kept looking for flying pine-splinters in the air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now they were setting off firecrackers under a boiler</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a man ran past with one hand dripping red paint,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Holding the hand with his other hand and talking</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>As if the hurt hand were a doll.</span>
					<span>An officer hit him</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the flat of a sword. It spanked some dust from his coat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the man’s face changed from a badly-fitting mask</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of terror, cut into ridges of sallow wax,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To something pink and annoyed, but he kept on running.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All this happened at once as they were moving.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dawn had been hit to pieces with a hard mallet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There were no fawns. There was an increasing noise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through which he heard the lugubrious voice of Bailey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing off-key, like a hymn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">“When I was a weaver, I lived by myself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">And I worked at the weaver’s tra-a-de⁠—”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The officers were barking like foxes now.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As the last tent dropped behind them, Ellyat saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A red, puzzled face, looking out from under a tent-flap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a bear from a cave. The face had been drunk last night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it stared at the end of the column with a huge and stupid wisdom.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>“When I was a weaver, I lived by myself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I worked at the weaver’s trade⁠—”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Jack Ellyat found himself back behind somebody’s tent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After a while. He had been out in the woods.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He remembered scrouging against a too-porous tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a day or a number of minutes while he jerked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A rattling ramrod up and down in a gun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they couldn’t stay in the woods⁠—they had to come back.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They had called him “Bull Run Jack” but they had to come back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bailey and all the rest. He had come back with them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that was different⁠—that was all right for him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This red-colored clang of haste was different for him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bailey and all the rest could run where they liked.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was an old soldier. He would stay here and fight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Running, he tripped on a rope, and began to fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bailey picked him back on his feet. “Did they get you, Bud?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“No, they didn’t get me.”</span>
					<span>Ellyat’s voice was a snarl.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What business had Bailey steadying him like that?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He hadn’t been running.</span>
					<span>Suddenly he saw</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gray shouting strangers bursting into the tents</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And his heart shrank up in a pea.</span>
					<span>“Oh hell,” he said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hopelessly ramming a cartridge. He was an old soldier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wasn’t going to run. He was going to act</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vast fictive heroisms in front of Bailey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If they only gave him time, just a little time.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A huge horse rose above the wall of the tent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hung there a second like a bad prodigy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>A frozen scream full of hoofs.</span>
					<span>He struck at its head</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tried to get out from under as it lunged down</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But he wasn’t quite quick enough.</span>
					<span>As he slipped and fell</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw the laughter pasted on Bailey’s face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But before he could hear the laugh, the horse had fallen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Jarring the world.</span>
					<span>After blunt, sickly time</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fat young man with a little pink moustache</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was bawling “Hey, Yank, surrender!” into his ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nervously waving a pistol in front of his eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He nodded weakly. “Hey, boys,” called the fat young man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I got two Yanks!” His mouth was childish with pleasure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was going to tell everybody he had two Yanks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Here, Yank, come and pull the horse off the other Yank.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The prisoner’s column straggled along the road</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All afternoon. Jack Ellyat marched in it numbly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was stiff and sore. They were going away from the battle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they could still hear it, quaking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The giant stones rolled over the grumbling bridge.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Some of the prisoners tried to joke with the guards,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some walked in silence, some spoke out now and then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if to explain to the world why they were there.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>One man said, “I got a sore heel.” Another said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“All the same the Tenth Missouri’s a damn good regiment.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another said, “Listen, boys, don’t it beat all hell?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I left my tobacco behind me, back in the tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Don’t it beat all hell to lose your tobacco like that?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bailey kept humming the “Weaver,” but now and then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He broke it off, to say, with a queer satisfaction,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Well, we surely did skedaddle⁠—we surely did.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jack Ellyat had said nothing for a long time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This was war, this was Phaëton, this was the bronze chariot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolling the sky. If he had a soul any more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It felt scrawny and thin as a sick turkey-poult.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was not worth the trouble to fatten. He tried to fatten it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With various thoughts, now and then, but the thoughts were spoilt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Corn. They had damn well skedaddled. They damn well had.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That was all. The rest of the army could win or lose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They had surely skedaddled. They had been whipped again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He had been whipped again.</span>
					<span>He was no longer</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old soldier⁠—no longer even “Bull Run Jack.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had lost a piece of himself. It had ragged edges</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That piece. He could see it left behind in the tents</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under a dirty coat and a slab of tobacco.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>After a while he knocked against Bailey’s arm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Where are we going?” he said, in a shy voice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bailey laughed, not badly, “Well, Colonel, Corinth I guess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Corinth first⁠—and then some damn prison-camp.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spat in the road. “It won’t be good grub,” he said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Bacon and hominy-grits. They don’t eat right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They don’t eat nothing but bacon and hominy-grits.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God, I’m goin’ to get tired of bacon and hominy-grits!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ellyat looked. There was something different about him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stated a fact. “You’ve buttoned your pants,” he said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I remember you didn’t have ’em buttoned this morning.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“That’s so,” said Bailey, impressed, “Now when did I button em?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They chewed at the question, trying to puzzle it out.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seemed very important to both for quite a long time.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>It was night now. The column still marched. But Bailey and Ellyat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had dropped to the rear of the column, planning escape.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There were few guards and the guards were as tired as they.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two men could fall in a ditch by the side of the road</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And get away, perhaps, if they picked a good time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They talked it over in stupid whispers of weariness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The next bend⁠—no, the guard was coming along.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The next bend after⁠—no, there was light for a moment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a brief star, then clouded⁠—the top of the hill⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bottom of the hill⁠—and they still were marching.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rain began to fall, a drizzle at first, then faster.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ellyat’s eyes were thick. He walked in a dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heavy dream, cut from leaden foil with blunt shears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Bailey touched him⁠—he felt the tired bones of his skull</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Click with a sudden spark⁠—his feet stopped walking⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He held his breath for an instant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then wearily slumped in the ditch with enormous noise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hunching his shoulders against a phantom bayonet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But when he could raise his head, the column had gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He felt fantastic. They couldn’t escape like this.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You had to escape like a drawing in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Harper’s Weekly</i></span>
				<br/>
				<span>With stiff little men on horses like sickle-pears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Firing round frozen cream-puffs into your back.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But they had escaped.</span>
					<span>Life came back to him in a huge</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wave of burnt stars. He wanted to sing and yell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He crackled out of the ditch and stood beside Bailey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had he ever hated Bailey? It could not have been.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He loved Bailey better than anything else in the world.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They moved slyly toward the woods, they were foxes escaped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wise foxes sliding away to a hidden earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To a sandy floor, to the warm fawn-flanks of sweet sleep.⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then an awful molasses-taffy voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind them yelled “Halt!” and “Halt!” and⁠—sudden explosion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of desultory popcorn in iron poppers⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wild running at random⁠—a crash among broken boughs⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fighting sound⁠—Bailey’s voice, half-strangled but clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“Run like hell, Jack, they’ll never catch you!”</span>
					<span>He ran like hell.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Time passed like the rain. Time passed and was one with the rain.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Ellyat woke from a nightmare and put out his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To touch the wall by his bed, but there was no wall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Then he listened for Bailey’s snoring.</span>
					<span>And he heard</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gorged, sweet pouring of water through infinite boughs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hiss of the big spilt drop on the beaten leaf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bird-voiced and innumerable rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wet quail piping, a thousand soaked black flutes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Building a lonely castle of sliding tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strange and half-cruel as a dryad’s bright grief.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ellyat huddled closer under the tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remembering what he could. He had run for years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had slept for years⁠—and yet it was still not dawn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seemed cruel to him that it should never be dawn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seemed cruel that Bailey was lost. He had meant to show</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some fictive heroisms in front of Bailey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had not. Bailey had saved his skin instead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Bailey was lost. And in him something was lost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something worse than defeat or this rain⁠—some piece of himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Some piece of courage.</span>
					<span>Now the slant rain began</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To creep through his sodden heart. He thought, with wild awe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“This is Nibelung Hall. I am lying in Nibelung Hall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am long dead. I fell there out of the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a wreck of horses, spilling the ball of the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they shut my eyes with stone runes and put me to sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a bier where the living stream perpetually flows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Past Ygdrasil and waters the roots of the world.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can hear the ravens scream from the cloudy roof.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can hear the bubbles rising in the clear stream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can hear the old gods shout in the heathen sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the hawk-Valkyrie carry the stiffened lumps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of corpse-faced heroes shriekingly to Valhalla.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is Nibelung Hall. I must break the runes from my eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>I must escape it or die.”</span>
					<span>He slept. The rain fell.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Melora Vilas, rising by candlelight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked at herself in the bottom of the tin basin</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And wished that she had a mirror.</span>
					<span>Now Spring was here,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She could kneel above the well of a forest pool</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And see the shadow hidden under the water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The intent brown eyes, the small face cut like a heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She looked at the eyes and the eyes looked back at her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But just when it seemed they could start to talk to each other⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“What are you like? Who are you?”⁠—</span>
					<span>a ripple flawed</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deep glass and the shadow trembled away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If she only had a mirror, maybe she’d know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something, she didn’t know what, but something important,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something like knowing your skin and you were alive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a good day, something as drenched as sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As wise as sleep, as piercing as the bee’s dagger.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But she’d never know it unless she could get a mirror</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they’d never get a mirror while they were hiders.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were bound to be hiders as long as the war kept on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pop was that way. She remembered roads and places.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She was seventeen. She had seen a lot of places,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lot of roads. Pop was always moving along.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Everybody she’d ever known was moving along.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—Dusty wagons full of chickens and children,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full of tools and quilts, Rising Sun and Roses of Sharon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mahogany dressers out of Grandmother’s house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tin plates, cracked china, a couple of silver spoons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moving from State to State behind tired, scuffed horses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because the land was always better elsewhere.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Next time they’d quit. Next stop they’d settle right down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Next year they’d have time to rub up the mahogany dresser.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Next place, Mom could raise the flowers she wanted to raise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it never began. They were always moving along.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She liked Kansas best. She wished they’d go back to Kansas.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She liked the smell of the wind there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Pop hadn’t wanted to join with the Free-Soilers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then the slavery men had shot up the town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And killed the best horse they had. That had settled Pop.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said something about a plague on both of your houses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And moved along. So now they were hiders here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whenever you wanted to ask Pop about the war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All he said was that same old thing about the plague.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She mustn’t call him Pop⁠—that was movers’-talk.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She must call him Father, the way Mom, Mother wanted.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it was hard to remember. Mom talked a lot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About old times back in the East and Grandmother’s house.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She couldn’t remember an East. The East wasn’t real.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was only the dusty road and moving along.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although she knew that Mom had worn a silk dress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gone to a ball, once. There was a picture of Pop</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Mom, looking Eastern, in queer old Eastern clothes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They weren’t white trash. She knew how to read and figure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She’d read <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Macbeth</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Beulah</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Oliver Twist</i>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She liked <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Beulah</i> best but <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Macbeth</i> would have suited Pop.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes she wondered what had happened to them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Mother used to live in Grandmother’s house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wear silk dresses, and Father used to read Latin⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When had they started to go just moving along,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how would it feel to live in Grandmother’s house?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But it was so long ago, so hard to work out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she liked it this way⁠—she even liked being hiders.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was exciting, especially when the guns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coughed in the sky as they had all yesterday,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Bent hid out in the woods to keep from recruiters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you knew there were armies stumbling all around you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Big, blundering cows of armies, snuffling and tramping</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The whole scuffed world with their muddy, lumbering hoofs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except the little lost brushpile where you were safe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There were guns in the sky again today. Big armies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>An army must be fine to look at.</span>
					<span>But Pop</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would never let her do it or understand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>An army or a mirror. She didn’t know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which she’d rather find, but whenever she thought of it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mirror generally won. You could keep a mirror yourself.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>She had to call the hogs that afternoon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You had to call them once or twice a month</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give them food or else they ran too wild</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never came for butchering in the Fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though they lived well enough without your calling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fat in the forest, feeding on beech mast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wild muscadines and forest provender</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That made their flesh taste sweet as hazelnuts.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She liked the hogs, they weren’t tame, sleepy hogs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grunting in a black wallow, they were proud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rapid and harsh and savage as Macbeth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was a young boar that she called Macbeth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She’d seen him fight grey-bristled, drowsy Duncan</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And drive him from the trough.</span>
					<span>Fagin was there,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bill Sikes was there and Beulah the black sow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Lady Macduff whose grunt was half a whine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You could learn lots about a book from hogs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She poured the swill and cupped her hands to call.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes they’d help her with it, Pop or Bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Pop was off with Bent this afternoon</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And Mom was always busy.</span>
					<span>Slim and straight</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She stood before the snake-rail pen that kept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Macbeths on their own proper side of the fence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Piggy,” she called, “Here, piggy, piggy, piggy!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It wasn’t the proper call, but the hogs knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sweet clear loudness with its sleepy silver</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trembling against a chanter of white ash.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Here, piggy, piggy, piggy, piggy, piggy!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here, piggy, piggy!” There was a scrambling noise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>At the edge of the woods. “Here, piggy!”</span>
					<span>It was Banquo.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Greedy, but hesitant.</span>
					<span>The Artful Dodger</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slim, black and wicked, had two feet in the trough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before that obese indecision moved.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“Here, piggy! Here, piggy, piggy!”</span>
					<span>The gleaming call</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Floated the air like a bright glassy bubble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far, far, with its clean silver and white ash.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Ellyat, lost and desperate in the wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard it, desirous as the elvish blast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wound on a tiny horn of magic grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To witch steel riders into a green hill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He stumbled toward its music.</span>
					<span>“Piggy, piggy,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Here, piggy, piggy,”</span>
					<span>The swine grunted and jostled.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Melora watched them, trying to count them up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With grave eyes, brown as nuts in rainwater.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were all there, she thought⁠—she must be sure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She called again. No, something moved in the woods.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She stared past the clearing, puzzled. So Ellyat saw her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond the swine, head lifted like a dark foal</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>That listens softly for strangeness.</span>
					<span>And she saw</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An incoherent scarecrow in blue clothes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stagger on wooden feet from the deep wood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She called to him to keep away from the hogs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Half-frightenedly.</span>
					<span>He did not hear or obey.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He was out of Nibelung Hall.</span>
					<span>She put one hand</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the rail of the fence to steady herself and waited.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“You can’t come in here,” she said, fiercely. “The hogs’ll kill you.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he was past the fed hogs and over the fence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She saw a queer look on his face. “You’re hungry,” she said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He grinned, made a noise in his throat, and fell, trying to touch her.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span class="i8">Now that I am clean again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">Now I’ve slept and fed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">How shall I remember when</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">I was someone dead?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i8">Now the balm has worked its art</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">And the gashes dry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">And the lizard at my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">Has a sleepy eye,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i8">How shall I remember yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">Freezing underground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">With the wakened lizard set</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">To the living wound?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i8">Do not ponder the offence</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">Nor reject the sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">Do not tear the cerements</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">Flesh may need once more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i8">Cold comes back and pain comes back</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">And the lizard, too.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">And the burden in the sack</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">May be meant for you.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i8">Do not play the risen dunce</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">With unrisen men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">Lazarus was risen once</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">But earth gaped again.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>So Ellyat swam back to life, swam back to warmth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the smell of cooking food. It was night. He heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impenetrable rain shake a low roof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hiss stray, scattering drops on an open fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he was safe. That rain was caged in the sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>It could not fall on him.</span>
					<span>He lay in a lax</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Idleness, warm and hungry, not wanting to move.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A grub in a close cocoon neither bold nor wise, but content.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A tall woman was cooking mush in an iron pot.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The smell of the mush was beautiful, the shape of the pot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More beautiful than an urn by sea-nymphs carved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From sunken marbles stained with the cold sea-rose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The woman was a great Norn, in her pot she cooked a new world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made of pure vapors and the juices of unspoilt light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A new globe of sulliless amber and grains of white corn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An orbed perfection. All life was beautiful now.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A girl came into the room upon light, quick feet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stared at her, solemnly. She was young and thin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The small, just head was set on the slender neck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a clean sureness. The heavy hair was a helm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bronze cooled under a ripple, marked by that flowing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was not slight but it could not weight her down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her hands and feet were well made and her body had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That effortless ease, that blood that flies with the bird.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She saw his open eyes and came over to him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Not shyly but not concernedly.</span>
					<span>Their eyes met.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The older woman kept stirring her melted world.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Well,” said the girl, “You look better.” He nodded, “Yes.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their eyes said, “I have seen a new thing. In the deep cells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Below the paltry clockwork of the ticked heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have seen something neither light nor night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A new thing, a new picture. It may mean</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lifting of a shut latch. It may mean nothing.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She made an escaping gesture with her right hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“You didn’t say who you were,” she said. “You just fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You better tell who you are, Pop’ll want to know.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shadow crossed her. “Pop won’t want to keep you,” she said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“But I reckon we’ll have to keep you here for a piece,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’re not fit to travel yet and that’s a fact.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You look a little bit like Young Seward,” she said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reflectively, “But sometimes you look more like Oliver.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>I dunno. What’s your name?”</span>
					<span>Ellyat put forth his hand</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toward being alive again, slowly, hauling it down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He remembered. He was Jack Ellyat. He had been lost.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had lain with hel-shoes on in Nibelung Hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For twenty years. This was the girl with the swine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose loud sweet calling had come to him in the wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lifted him back to warmth and a cooking world.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had lost a piece of himself, a piece of life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He must find it, but now⁠—</span>
					<span>“What’s your name?” he said in a whisper.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>This is the hidden place that hiders know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is where hiders go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Step softly, the snow that falls here is different snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rain has a different sting.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Step softly, step like a cloud, step softly as the least</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whisper of air against the beating wing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let your eyes be sealed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With two blue muscadines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stolen from secret vines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or you will never find in the lost field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The table spread, the signs of the hidden feast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This is where hiders live.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is the tentative</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And outcast corner where hiders steal away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bake their hedgehogs in a lump of clay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To raise their crops and children wild and shy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let the world go by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In accidental marches of armed wrath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That stumble blindly past the buried path.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Step softly, step like a whisper, but do not speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or you will never see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The furriness curled within the hollow tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shadow-dance upon the wilderness-creek.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is the hiders’ house.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is the ark of pine-and-willow-boughs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is the quiet place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You may call now, but let your call be sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As clover-honey strained through silver sieves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And delicate as the dust upon the moth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or you will never find your fugitives.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call once, and call again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, if the lifted strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has the true color and substance of the wild,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You may perceive, if you have lucky eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something that ran away from being wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And changed silk ribbons for a greener cloth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some budding-horned and deer-milk-suckled child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some lightness, moving toward you on light feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some girl with indolent passion in her face.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Jack Ellyat wondered about things, six days later.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The world had come back to its shape. He was well and strong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had seen the old man with the burnt dreams in his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who had fallen from something years ago in his youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or risen from something with an effort too stark;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The runaway who had broken the pasture-bars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To test the figments of life on a wild stone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You could see the ultimate hardness of that strange stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut in his face⁠—but then, there was something else,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That came at moments and went, and answered no questions.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had the feel of the stone been worth it, after all?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>It puzzled Ellyat.</span>
					<span>He couldn’t figure it out.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Going West to get fat acres was common enough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, once you got the acres, you settled down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You sent your children to school. You put up a fence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When a war came along, you fought on your proper side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You didn’t blast both sides with Mercutio’s curse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And hide in a wilderness.</span>
					<span>The man was all wrong,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet the man was not weak. It was very strange.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the man had been weak, you could understand him all right.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The woman was more easy to understand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He liked the woman⁠—he liked the rough shaggy boy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who had lived so much in the woods to keep from the armies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That his ears were sharp as a squirrel’s, and all his movements</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had something untamed about them, something leafy and strange.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of course he ought to be fighting for the North,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was really a skulk⁠—but things were different here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You couldn’t reason about the difference in words</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But you felt it inside your skin.</span>
					<span>Things were different here.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like Nibelung Hall in the rain of his fever-dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with no terror, with an indolent peace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He’d have to get back to the regiment pretty soon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He couldn’t stay here. They none of them wanted him here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’d have to get back. But he didn’t know where to go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They could tell him how to get back to Pittsburg Landing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But how did he know if the army was there or not?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He didn’t even know who’d won in the battle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, if the Rebs had won, he’d be captured again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>As soon as he got on a road.</span>
					<span>Well, he’d have to chance it.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He couldn’t stay here and fall in love with Melora.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Melora came walking down the crooked path</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a long shadow before her. It was the hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the heat is out of the gold of afternoon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the cooled gold has not yet turned into grey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hour of the paused tide, neither flow nor ebb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flower beginning to close but not yet closed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He saw her carry her fairy head aloft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against that descending gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw the long shadow that her slight body made.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When she came near enough to him, she heard him humming</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tune he had thought forgotten, the weaver’s tune.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And the only harm that I’ve ever done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was to love a pretty maid.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She halted, trying to listen. He stopped the tune.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“What’s that you were singing?” she said.</span>
					<span>“Oh, just trash,” he said.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“I liked it. Sing it some more.”</span>
					<span>But he would not sing it.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They regarded each other a foot or so apart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their shadows blotted together into one shadow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She put her hand to both cheeks, and touched them lightly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>As if to cool them from something.</span>
					<span>A soft, smooth shock</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inexplicable as the birth of a star</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And terrible as the last cry of the flesh</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Ran through his cords and struck.</span>
					<span>He stared at the shadows.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then she took her shadow into the house with her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he still stood looking where the shadows had touched.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>John Vilas watched them go off through the wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To get the water from the other spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The big pail clanking between them.</span>
					<span>His hard mouth</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was wry with an old nursery-rhyme, but his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Looked somewhere beyond hardness.</span>
					<span>Let them go.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Harriet said and Harriet always said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Harriet was right, but let them go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men who go looking for the wilderness-stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And find it, should not marry or beget,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, having done so, they must take the odds</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>As the odds are.</span>
					<span>Faustus and I are old.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We creep about among the hollow trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the bright devils of our youth have gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a dissolving magic, back to earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in our tarnished and our antique wands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the rusty metal of our spells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There still remain such stubbornness and pith</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As may express elixirs from a rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or pick a further quarrel with the gods</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Should we find cause enough.</span>
					<span>I know this girl,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This boy, this youth, this honey in the blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This kingly danger, this immediate fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know what comes of it and how it lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how, long afterwards, at the split core</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the prodigious and self-eaten lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little grain of truth lies undissolved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By all the acids of philosophy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore, I will not seek a remedy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against a sword but in the sword itself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor medicine life with anything but life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am too old to try the peddler’s tricks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too wise, too foolish, too long strayed in the wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The custom of the world is not my custom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Nor its employments mine.</span>
					<span>I know this girl</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As well as if I never lay with her mother.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know her heart touched with that wilderness-stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That turns good money into heaps of leaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And builds an outcast house of apple-twigs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside a stream that never had a name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She will forget what I cannot forget,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she may learn what I shall never learn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, while the wilderness-stone is strong in her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’d have her use it for a touchstone yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And see the double face called good and bad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her own eyes. So, if she stares it down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She is released, and if it conquers her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She was not weighted with a borrowed shield.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We are no chafferers, my daughter and I.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We give what pleases us and when we choose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, having given, we do not take back.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But once we shut our fists upon a star</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It will take portents to unloose that grip</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even then the stuff will keep the print.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>It is a habit of living.</span>
					<span>For the boy</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I do not know but will not stand between.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He has more toughness in him than he thinks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—I took my wife out of a pretty house.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—I took my wife out of a pleasant place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—I stripped my wife of comfortable things.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—I drove my wife to wander with the wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>—And we are old now, Faustus.</span>
					<span>Let it be so.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was one man who might have understood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because he was half-oriole and half-fox,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not Emerson, but the man by Walden Pond.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he was given to the birds in youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never had a woman or a daughter.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>The filled pail stood on a stone by the lip of the spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But they had forgotten the pail.</span>
					<span>The spring was a cool</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wavering mirror that showed them their white, blurred faces</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made them wonder to see the faces so like</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And yet so silent and distant.</span>
					<span>Melora turned.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“We ought to go back,” she said in a commonplace voice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“Not yet, Melora.”</span>
					<span>Something, as from the spring</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rising, in silver smoke, in arras of silvers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drifting around them, pushed by a light, slow wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“Not yet Melora.”</span>
					<span>They sat on a log above.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Melora’s eyes were still looking down at the spring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Her knees were hunched in her arms.</span>
					<span>“You’ll be going,” she said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Staring at the dimmed glass. “You’ll be going soon.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The silver came closer, soaking into his body,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soaking his flesh with bright, impalpable dust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He could smell her hair. It smelt of leaves and the wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He could smell the untaken whiteness of her clean flesh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deep, implacable fragrance, fiercer than sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Sweeter than long sleep in the sun.</span>
					<span>He touched her shoulder.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She let the hand stay but still she gazed at the spring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Then, after a while, she turned.</span>
					<span>The mirrored mouths</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fused in one mouth that trembled with the slow waters.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Melora, in the room she had to herself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because they weren’t white-trash and used to be Eastern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the rain of her hair fall down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a stream, in a flood, on the white birch of her body.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She was changed, then. She was not a girl any more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She was the white heart of the birch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half hidden by a fleece that a South wind spun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of bronze air and light, on a wheel of light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her sharp clear breasts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were two young victories in the hollow darkness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when she stretched her hands above her head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let the spun fleece ripple to her loins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her body glowed like deep springs under the sun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She had no song to sing herself asleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tonight, but she would need no song to sing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thousand thoughts ran past her in a brief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unhurrying minute, on small, quiet feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But did not change her. Nothing could change her now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—Black winter night against the windowpane</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she, a child, singing her fear to sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With nursery-rhymes and broken scraps of tunes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How well she could remember those old songs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But this night she would sleep without a song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except the song the earth knows in the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the huge embrace of the bright day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And that was better.</span>
					<span>She thought to herself.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I don’t know. I can’t think. I ought to be scared.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I ought to have lots of maybes. I can’t find them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s funny. It’s different. It’s a big pair of hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pushing you somewhere⁠—but you’ve got to go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maybe you’re crazy but you’ve got to go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That’s why Mom went. I know about Mom now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know how she used to be. It’s pretty sweet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s rhymes, it’s hurting, it’s feeling a bird’s heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beat in your hand, it’s children growing up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s being cut to death with bits of light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s wanting silver bullets in your heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s not so happy, but it’s pretty sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>I’ve got to go.”</span>
					<span>She passed her narrow hands</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over her body once, half-wonderingly.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Divide this transitory and temporal flesh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into twelve ears of red and yellow corn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And plant each ear beside a different stream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, in the summer, when the harvesters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come with their carts, the grain shall change again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And turn into a woman’s body again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And walk across a heap of sickle-blades</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To find the naked body of its love.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She slipped her dress back on and stole downstairs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bare feet, whispering, made little sound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sleeper breathed, a child turned in its sleep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She heard the tiny breathings. She shut the door.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The moon rode a high heaven streaked with cloud.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She watched it for a moment. Then she drank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That moon from its high heaven with her mouth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And felt the immaculate burning of that frost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Run from her fingers in such corporal silver</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her whole slight body was a corposant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hollow light and the cold sap of the moon.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She knew the dark grass cool beneath her feet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She knew the opening of the stable door.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It shut behind her. She was in darkness now.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Jack Ellyat, lying in a warm nest of hay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stared at the sweet-smelling darkness with troubled eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was going tomorrow. He couldn’t skulk any more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—Oh, reasonless thirst in the night, what can slake your thirst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reasonless heart, why will you not let me rest?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have seen a woman wrapped in the grace of leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have kissed her mouth with my mouth, but I must go⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was going back to find a piece of himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he had lost in a tent, in a red loud noise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under a sack of tobacco. Until he found it</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He could never be whole again</span>
					<span>—but the hunger creeps</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a vine about me, crushing my narrow wisdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Crushing my thoughts⁠—</span>
					<span>He couldn’t stay with Melora.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He couldn’t take her back home. If he were Bailey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He would know what to do. He would follow the weaver’s tune.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He would keep Melora a night from the foggy dew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then go off with the sunrise to tell the tale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometime for a campfire yarn. But he wasn’t Bailey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw himself dead without ever having Melora</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And he didn’t like it.</span>
					<span>Maybe, after the war.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maybe he could come back to the hider’s place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maybe⁠—it is a long time till after the war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this is now⁠—you took a girl when you found her⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A girl with flags on her garters or a new girl⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It didn’t matter⁠—it made a good campfire yarn⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was men and women⁠—Bailey⁠—the weaver’s tune⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He heard something move and rustle in the close darkness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What’s that?” he said. He got no answering voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he knew what it was. He saw a light-footed shadow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come toward the nest where he lay. For a moment then</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He felt weak, half-sickened almost.</span>
					<span>Then his heart began</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pound to a marching rhythm that was not harsh</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Nor sweet, but enormous cadence.</span>
					<span>“Melora,” he said.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hand went out and touched the cup of her breast.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span class="i5">What things shall be said of you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Terrible beauty in armor?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">What things shall be said of you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Horses riding the sky?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The fleetness, the molten speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The rhythm rising like beaten</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Drums of barbaric gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Until fire mixes with fire?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i5">The night is a sparkling pit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Where Time no longer has power</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">But only vast cadence surging</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Toward an instant of tiny death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Then, with the slow withdrawal</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Of seas from a rock of moonlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The clasping bodies unlock</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">And the lovers have little words.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i5">What is this spear, this burnished</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Arrow in the deep waters</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">That is not quenched by them</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Until it has found its mark?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">What is this beating of wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">In the formless heart of the tempest?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">This wakening of a sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">That was not wakened before?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i5">They have dragged you down from the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">And broken you with an ocean</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Because you carried the day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Phaëton, charioteer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">But still you loose from the cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The matched desires of your horses</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">And sow on the ripened earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The quickened, the piercing flame.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i5">What things shall be said of you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Terrible beauty in armor?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Dance that is not a dance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Brief instant of welded swords.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">For a moment we strike the black</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Door with a fist of brightness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">And then it is over and spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">And we sink back into life.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i5">Back to the known, the sure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The river of sleep and waking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The dreams floating the river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The nearness, the conquered peace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">You have come and smitten and passed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Poniard, poniard of sharpness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The child sleeps in the planet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The blood sleeps again.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>He wasn’t going away when he went to the wood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He told himself that. They had broken the dime together.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>They had cut the heart on the tree.</span>
					<span>The jack-knife cut</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two pinched half-circles of white on the green bark.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tree-gum bled from the cuts in sticky, clear drops,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And there you were.</span>
					<span>And shortly the bark would dry</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dead on the living wood and leave the white heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All through the winter, all through the rain and snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A phantom-blaze to guide a tall phantom-hunter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who came in lightness along a leaf-buried path.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All through the snowing winter it would be white.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It would take many springs to cover that white again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What have I done in idleness, in sweet idleness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>What have I done to the forest?</span>
					<span>I have marked</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tree to be my own with a jack-knife blade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In idleness, in sweet idleness. I have loosed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dryad out of the tree to chain me with wild</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grapevines and forest trailers forever and ever</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the hider’s place, to the outcast house of the lost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now, when I would be free, I am free no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thought of practical matters. There ought to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A preacher and a gold ring and a wedding-dress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Only how could there be?</span>
					<span>He rolled hard words</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over his tongue. “A shotgun wedding,” he said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It wasn’t like that, it never could be like that,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But there was a deadly likeness.</span>
					<span>He saw the bored</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shamfaced seducer in the clean Sunday collar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The whining, pregnant slut in the cheesecloth veil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They weren’t like that⁠—but the picture colored his mind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If he only could go away without going away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And have everything turn out just as it ought to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Without rings or hiding!</span>
					<span>He told himself “I’m all right.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’m not like Bailey. I wouldn’t sleep with a girl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who never slept with anybody before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And then just go off and leave her.”</span>
					<span>But it was Melora.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It wasn’t seducing a girl. It was all mixed up.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All real where it ought to be something told in a sermon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all unreal when you had to do something about it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His thoughts went round and round like rats in a cage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But all he knew was⁠—</span>
					<span>he was sick for a room</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a red tablecloth with tasselled fringes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where a wife knitted on an end of a scarf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A father read his paper through the same</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unchanging spectacles with the worn bows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a young girl beneath a nickeled lamp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soundlessly conjugated Latin verbs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Amo, amas, amat,” and still no sound⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Slight dryad, trailing the green, curled vines of the Spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I hate you for this moment, I hate your white breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And idleness, sweet, hidden idleness⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He started awake. He had been walking through dreams.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How far had he come? He studied the sun and the trees.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Was he lost? No, there was the way.</span>
					<span>He turned back slowly,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the dryad, the idleness⁠—to the cheesecloth veil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The incredible preacher, the falling out of life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’d ask her this evening where you could find such preachers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old man mustn’t know till the thing was done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or he would turn to a father out of a cheap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Play, a cheap shotgun father with a wool beard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roaring gilt rhetoric⁠—and loading a musket.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He got the dry grins.</span>
					<span>If the property-father shot him</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would they carve his name on the soldiers’ monument</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>After the war?</span>
					<span>There should be a special tablet.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Here lies John Ellyat Junior, shot and killed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By an angry father for the great cause of Union.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>‘How sleep the brave.’ ”</span>
					<span>He stumbled and looked around him.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Well, I might go on as far as the road,” he said.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A little while later he burst through the screen of brush.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And saw the highroad below him.</span>
					<span>He wiped his face.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The road dipped down a hill to a little bridge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He was safe enough now.</span>
					<span>What was it Melora had said?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The highroad was six miles away from the farm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Due west, and he could tell the west by the sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He must have covered a dozen, finding the road,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But getting back would be easy.</span>
					<span>The sun was high.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He ought to be starting soon. But he lay down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stared for a while at the road. It was good to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A road in the open again, a dust-bitten road</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where people and horses went along to a town.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—Dryad, deep in the woods, your trails are small,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Winding and faint⁠—they run between grass and flowers⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it is good once more to come on a road</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That is not drowsy with your idleness⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He looked down toward the bridge. There were moving blobs of dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crossing it⁠—men on horses. His heart gave a strange</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throb of desire. What were they? They looked like soldiers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blue coats or grey? He could not tell for the dust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’d have to get back in the woods before they passed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was a hider now. But he kept on staring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A long two minutes, trying to make them out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till his eyes stung. One man had a yellow beard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And carried his rifle slung the Missouri way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But there were Missouri troops on either side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a minute he could tell⁠—and wriggle away⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>A round stick jabbed in his back.</span>
					<span>A slow voice said</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Reach for the sky, Yank, or I’ll nachully drill yuh.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>His hands flew up.</span>
					<span>“Yuh’re the hell of a scout,” said the voice</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With drawling scorn. “Yuh h’ain’t even got a gun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I could have picked yuh off ten minutes ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yuh made more noise than a bear, bustin thru’ that bresh.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What’d yuh ust to work at⁠—wrappin’ up corsets?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Yeah⁠—yuh kin turn around.”</span>
					<span>Jack Ellyat turned</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Incredulously.</span>
					<span>“Well, I’ll be damned,” said the boy</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In butternut clothes with the wrinkled face of a leaf.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Yuh’re a young ’un all right⁠—aw, well, don’t take it so hard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our boys get captured, too. Hey, Billy!” he called,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“Got a Yankee scout.”</span>
					<span>The horse-hoofs stopped in the road.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“Well, bring him along,” said a voice.</span>
					<span>Jack Ellyat slid</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down a little bank and stood in front of the horses.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was dazed. This was not happening. But the horses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were there, the butternut men on the horses were there.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A gaunt old man with a sour, dry mouth was talking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“He’s no scout,” he said, “He’s one of their lousy spies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Don’t he look like a spy? Let’s string him up to a tree.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eye roved, looking for a suitable branch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>His mouth seemed pleased.</span>
					<span>Ellyat saw two little scooped dishes,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hung on a balance, wavering in the air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One was bright tin and carried his life and breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other was black. They were balanced with dreadful evenness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now the black dish trembled, starting to fall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hell, no,” said the boy with the face like a wrinkled leaf.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“He’s a scout all right. What makes yuh so savage, Ben?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yuh’re always hankerin’ after a necktie-party.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Who captured the bugger anyhow?”</span>
					<span>“Oh, well,”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said the other man. “Oh, well.” He spat in the dust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Anyhow,” he said, with a hungry look at Ellyat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“He’s got good boots.”</span>
					<span>The boy with the wrinkled face</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remarked that, as for the boots, no Arkansaw catfish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was going to take them away from their lawful captor.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The rest sat their horses loosely and looked at him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With mild curiosity, ruminating tobacco.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Ellyat tried to think. He could not think.</span>
					<span>He was free,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These stuffless men on stuffless horses had freed him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From dryads and fathers, from cheesecloth veils and Melora.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He began to talk fast. He didn’t hear what he said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“But I’ve got to get back,” he said. Then he stopped. They laughed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Oh, yuh’ll get over it, Bub,” said the wrinkled boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“It ain’t so bad. You won’t have to fight no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maybe yuh’ll git exchanged. Git up on that horse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>No, take off them boots first, thanks.”</span>
					<span>He slung the boots</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around his neck. “Now I got some good boots,” he said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grinned at the gaunt man with the sour mouth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now, Bub, I’ll just tie yuh a little with this yere rope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then you won’t be bustin’ loose from the gang.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Grab the pommel as well as yuh kin.”</span>
					<span>The gaunt man coughed.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I tell you,” he said, in a disappointed voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If we just strung him up it’d make things a hull lot easier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’s a spy for sure, and everyone strings up spies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We got a long piece to go yet and he’s a nuisance.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Aw, shut yore face,” said Jim Breckinridge in a drawl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Yuh kin hang any Yanks yuh ketch on a piece uh dishrag,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Yuh ain’t caught no armies yit.”</span>
					<span>The gaunt man was silent.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ellyat saw the little tin dish that carried the life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slowly sink down, to safety, the black dish rise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Come on,” said Billy. The horses started to move,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stirring a dust that rose for a little while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a faint cloud. But after the horses had gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cloud settled, the road went to sleep again.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
