<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-6" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Cudjo breathed on the silver urn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rubbed till his hand began to burn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his hoarded scrap of chamois-skin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The metal glittered like bright new tin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet, as he labored, his mouth was sad⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Times is gettin’ almighty bad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Christmas a-comin’, sure and swif’,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But no use hollerin’ ‘Christmas Gif!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No use keepin’ the silver fittin’,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No use doin’ nothin’ but sittin’.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old Marse Billy stayin’ away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yankees shootin’ at Young Marse Clay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grey hairs in Miss Mary’s brush,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a-whooin’ wind in de berry-bush,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dat young red setter done eat her pups,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We was washin’ de tea set an’ bust two cups,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just come apart in Liza’s han’⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Christmas, where has you gwine to, man?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Won’t you never come back again?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I feels like a cat in de outdoors rain.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Christmas used to come without fail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A big old man with a raccoan tail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So fine and bushy it brushed the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made folks sneeze when he waltzed around.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was rolling river and lucky sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a laugh like a double-barrelled gun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the chip-straw hat on his round, bald head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was full of money and gingerbread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Come in, Christmas, and have a cheer!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, if he’s comin’, he won’t stop here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He likes folks cheerful and dinners smokin’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And famblies shootin’ off caps and jokin’,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he won’t find nothin’ on dis plantation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But a lot of grievin’ conversation.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dey’s tooken de carpets and window-weights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To go and shoot at de Yankee States,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dey’s tooken Nelly, de cross-eye mule,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whoever took her was one big fool;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dey’s tooken dis an’ dey’s tooken dat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till I kain’t make out what dey’s drivin’ at.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if Ole Marse Billy could see dis place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’d cuss all Georgia blue in de face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see me wuhkin with dis ole shammy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a field-hand-nigger fum Alabammy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Ole Miss wearin’ a corn-husk hat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dippin’ ole close in de dyein’ vat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scrapin’ her petticoats up for lint</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An’ bilin’ her tea out of julep-mint.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Young Marse Clay he’d feel mighty sad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If he’d seed de weddin’ his sisters had.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>De grooms was tall and de brides was fine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But dey drunk de health in blackberry wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And supper was thu at half-past-nine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Weddin’s ust to last for a week,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now we’s rowin’ up Hard Times Creek.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somethin’s conjured dis white-folks’ South,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somethin’ big with a hongry mouth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eatin’ an’ eatin’⁠—I done my bes’,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scattered de fedders and burnt de nes’,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filled de bottle an’ made de hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An’ buried de trick in Baptis’ land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An’ dat trick’s so strong, I was skeered all night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, somehow or udder, it don’ wuhk right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ef I got me a piece of squinch-owl’s tail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An’ some dead-folks’ yearth fum de county jail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It mout wuhk better⁠—but I ain’t sho’,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And de wind keeps scrabblin’ under de do’,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scratchin’ and scratchin’ his buzzard-claws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Won’t nuthin’ feed you, hungry jaws?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Field hands keeps on hoein’ de corn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stupidest niggers ever born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All dey’s good for is gravy-lickin’,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ram-buttin’ and cotton-pickin’;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dey don’t hear de wind in de slew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But dat wind’s blowin’ over ’em too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An’ dat wind’s res’less an’ dat wind’s wile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An’ dat wind aches like a motherless chile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Won’t nuthin’ feed you, achin’ wind?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The hand stopped rubbing. The spoons were shined.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He put them back in the flannel bag</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stared at his scrap of chamois-rag.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>War was a throat that swallowed things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you couldn’t cure it with conjurings.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Sally Dupré watched over her dyeing-pots,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evening was setting in with a light slow rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That marched like a fairy army⁠—there being nothing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the white fog on the hill to the soaked door-stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But a moving grey and silver hurry of lances,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Distinct yet crowded, thin as the edge of the moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Carried in no fleshed hand.</span>
					<span>She thought to herself,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I have stained my arms with new colors, doing this work,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The red is pokeberry-juice, the grey is green myrtle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The deep black is queen’s delight.</span>
					<span>If he saw me now</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With my hands so parti-colored he would not know them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He likes girls’ hands that nothing has stained but lotions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>This is too fast a dye.</span>
					<span>I will dye my heart</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a pot of queen’s delight, in the pokeberry sap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will dye it red and black in the fool’s old colors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And send it to him, wrapped in a calico rag,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>To keep him warm through the rain.</span>
					<span>It will keep him warm.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And women in love do better without a heart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What fools we are to wait the wheel of the year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The year will not help our trouble.</span>
					<span>What fools we are</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To give our parti-colored hearts to the rain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I am tired of the slogans now and tired of the saving,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I want to dance all night in a brand-new dress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And forget about wars and love and the South and courage.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The South is an old high house full of charming ladies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The war is a righteous war full of gallant actions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And love is a white camellia worn in the hair.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But I am tired of talking to charming ladies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the smell of the white camellia, I will dye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My hands twice as black as ink in the working waters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wait like a fool for bitter love to come home.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He was wounded this year. They hurt him. They hurt you, darling.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have no doubt she came with a bunch of flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And talked to your wound and you like a charming lady.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have no doubt that she came.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Her heart is not parti-colored. She’ll not go steeping</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her gentle hands in the pulp and the dead black waters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the crooked blot lies there like a devil’s shadow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the heart is stained with the stain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If I came to the bed where you lay sick and in fever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would not come with little tight-fisted flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with the white heron’s plume that lay in the forest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till it was cooler than sleep.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The living balm would touch on your wound less gently,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Georgia sun less fierce than my arms to hold you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The steel bow less stubborn than my curved body</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strung against august death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They hurt you, darling, they hurt you and I not with you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I nowhere there to slit the cloth from your burning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To find the head of the man who fired the bullet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give his eyes to the crows.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>House, house, house, it is not that my friend was wounded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that you kept him from me while he had freedom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You and the girl whose heart is a snuffed white candle⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now I will curse you both.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Comely house, high-courteous house of the gentle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You must win your war for my friend is mixed in your quarrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But then you must fall, you must fall, for your walls divide us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your worn stones keep us apart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I am sick of the bland camellias in your old gardens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your pride and passion are not my pride and my passion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am strangling to death in your cables of honeysuckle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your delicate lady-words.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I would rather dig in the earth than learn your patience,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have need of a sky that never was cut for dresses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a rough ground to tear my hands on like lion’s clothing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a hard wheel to move.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The low roof by the marches of rainy weather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sharp love that carries the fool’s old colors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bare bed that is not a saint’s or a lady’s,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strong death at the end.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They hurt you, darling, they hurt you, and I not with you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I nowhere by to see you, to touch my darling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take your fever upon me if I could take it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And burn my hands at your wound.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If I had been there⁠—oh, how surely I would have found you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How surely killed your foe⁠—and sat by your bedside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All night long, like a mouse, like a stone unstirring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only to hear your slow breath moving the darkness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only to hear, more precious than childish beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slow tired beat of your heart.”</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Wingate sat by a smoky fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mending a stirrup with rusty wire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brows were clenched in the workman’s frown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a day or a week they’d be back in town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thought of it with a brittle smile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That mocked at guile for its lack of guile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mocked at ease for its lack of ease.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was better riding through rainy trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And playing tag with the Union spies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than telling ladies the pleasant lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet, what else could you do, on leave?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He touched a rent in his dirty sleeve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That was the place that the bullet tore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the blue-chinned picket whose belt he wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The man who hadn’t been quick enough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the powder-burn on the other cuff</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Belonged to the fight with the Yankee scout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who died in Irish when he went out.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thought of these things as a man might think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of certain trees by a river-brink,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seen in a flash from a passing train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, before you could look at them, gone again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was more important to eat and drink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than give the pain or suffer the pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And life was too rapid for memory.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“There are certain things that will cling to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not the things that I thought would cling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the wound in my body cannot sting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the tame black crow with the bandaged wing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nervous eye and the hungry craw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That picked at the dressing-station straw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till I was afraid it would pick my eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And couldn’t lift hand to beat it off.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can tell the ladies the usual lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the wild night-duels when two scouts clash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And your only light is his pistol-flash;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I remember a watering-trough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lost in a little brushwood town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the feel of Black Whistle slumping down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under my knees in the yellow air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hit by a bullet from God knows where⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not the long, mad ride round the Union lines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the smell of the swamp at Seven Pines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The smell of the swamp by Gaines’s Mill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Lee in the dusk before Malvern Hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Riding along with his shoulders straight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a sending out of the Scaean Gate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cold intaglio of war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘This is Virginia’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Iliad</i>,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Troy was taken nevertheless⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I remember the eyes my father had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When we saw our dead in the Wilderness⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I cannot remember any more⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lucy will wear her English gown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the Black Horse Troop comes back to town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pin her dress with a silver star</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tell our shadows how brave we are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lucy I like your white-and-gold⁠—”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He blew on his hands for the day was cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the damp, green wood gave little heat:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was something in him that matched the sleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And washed its hands in a rainy dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the stirrup-strap and the horses’ steam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Shepley and Bristol behind his back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Playing piquet with a dog-eared pack</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the hiss of the sap in the smoky wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mixed for a moment in something good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something outside of peace or war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or a fair girl wearing a silver star,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something hardly as vain as pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gaunt as the men he rode beside.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It made no comments but it was there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Real as the color of Lucy’s hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the taste of Henry Weatherby’s wine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thought “These people are friends of mine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we certainly fooled the Yanks last week,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When we caught those wagons at Boiling Creek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I guess we’re not such a bad patrol</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If we never get straight with the muster-roll,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I guess, next Spring, we can do it again⁠—”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bristol threw down a flyspecked ten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Theah,” he said, in the soft, sweet drawl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That could turn as hard as a Minie-ball,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“This heah day is my lucky day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Shepley nevah could play piquet.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stretched his arms in a giant yawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Gentlemen, when are we movin’ on?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have no desire for a soldier’s end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While I still have winnin’s that I can spend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they’s certain appointments with certain ladies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which I’d miss right smart if I went to Hades,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Especially one little black-eyed charmer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose virtue, one hopes, is her only armor.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So if Sergeant Wingate’s mended his saddle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I suggest that we all of us now skedaddle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To employ a term that the Yankees favor⁠—”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He tasted his words, for he liked the flavor.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And yet, one dreads to be back,” said he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“One knows how tippled one well may be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If one meets with the oppor-tun-ity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even the charmers can likewise raise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unpleasant doubts that may last for days⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And as one,” he sighed, “of our martial lads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’d rather be chargin’ Columbiads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than actin’ sweet to some old smooth-bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he tells me how he could win the War</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By burnin’ the next Yank crossroads-store.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Yanks aren’t always too blame polite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they fight like sin when they’ve got to fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after they’ve almost nailed your hide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To your stinkin’ saddle in some ole ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It makes you mad when some nice home-guard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tells you they nevah could combat hard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have no desire to complain or trouble</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I’d find this conflict as comfortable</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a big green pond for a duck to swim in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If it wasn’t for leave, and the lovin’ women.”</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>The snow lay hard on the hills. You could burn your eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By too-long-looking into the cold ice-lens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of infinite, pure, glittering, winter air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was as cold as that, as sparkling as that,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the crystal trees stood up like strange, brittle toys</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the sleet storm passed, till the setting sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hung the glass boughs with rainbows frozen to gems</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the long blue shadows pooled in the still hill-hollows.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The white and the purple lilacs of New England</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are frozen long, they will not bloom till the rains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when you look from the window, you see them there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>A great field of white lilacs.</span>
					<span>A gathered sheaf</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of palest blossoms of lilac, stained with the purple evening.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Jack Ellyat turned away from the window now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The frosty sleighbell of winter was in his ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw the new year, a child in a buffalo-robe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dragged in a sleigh whose runners were polished steel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up the long hill of February, into chill light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The child slept in the robe like a reindeer-colt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nuzzled under the winter. The bright bells rang.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He warmed his hands at the stove and shivered a little</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Hearing that ice-sweet chime.</span>
					<span>He was better now,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But his blood felt thin when he thought of skating along</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over black agate floors in the bonfire light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or beating a girl’s red mittens free of the snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he slept badly at times, when his flesh recalled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Certain smells and sights that were prison.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He stared at the clock where Phaëton’s horses lunged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a queer nod of recognition. The rest had altered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>People and winter and nightmares and Ellen Baker,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or stayed in a good dimension that he had lost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Phaëton was the same. He said to himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I have met you twice, old, drunken charioteer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once in the woods, and once in a dirty shack</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Death was a coin of spittle left on the floor.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I suppose we will meet again before there’s an end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Well, let it happen.</span>
					<span>It must have been cold last year</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Fredericksburg. I’m glad I wasn’t in that.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Melora, what’s happened to you?”</span>
					<span>He saw Melora</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walking down from the woods in the low spring light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His body hurt for a minute, but then it stopped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was getting well. He’d have to go back pretty soon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He grinned, a little dryly, thinking of chance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Father had seen the congressman after all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just before Shiloh. So now, nearly ten months later,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The curious wheels that are moved by such congressmen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were sending him back to the Army of the Potomac,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back with the old company, back with the Eastern voices,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Henry Fairfield limping along with his sticks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Shot through both hips at Antietam.</span>
					<span>He didn’t care,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except for losing Bailey, which made it tough.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He tried to puzzle out the change in his world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But gave it up. Things and people looked just the same,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You could love or like or detest them just the same way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But whenever you tried to talk of your new dimension</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It didn’t sound right, except to creatures like Bailey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I have met you twice, old, drunken charioteer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The third time you may teach me how to be cool.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ned, asleep by the stove, woke up and yawned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hello Ned,” said his master, with a half-smile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I told a girl about you, back in a wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’d like that girl. She’d rub the back of your ears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Bailey’d like you too. I wish Bailey was here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Want to go to war, Ned?” Ned yawned largely again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ellyat laughed. “You’re right, old fella,” he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“You get too mixed up in a war. You better stay here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God, I’d like to sleep by a stove for a million years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turn into a dog and remember how to stand cold.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clock struck five. Jack Ellyat jumped at the sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then he sank back. “No, fooled you that time,” he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>As if the strokes had been bullets.</span>
					<span>Then he turned</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see his mother, coming in with a lamp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And taste the strange tastes of supper and quietness.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>John Vilas heard the beating of another</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sleet at another and a rougher wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While his hands knotted together and then unknotted.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each time she had to moan, his hands shut down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the moans were coming close together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Close as bright streaks of hail.</span>
					<span>The younger children</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slept the uneasy sleep of innocent dogs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who know there’s something strange about the house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stranger than storms, and yet they have to sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And someone has to watch them sleeping now.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Harriet’s right and Harriet’s upstairs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Harriet cried like this when she gave birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eighteen years back, in that chintz-curtained room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her long cry ran like an icicle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into my veins. I can remember yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The terrible old woman with the shawl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who sat beside me, like deserted Fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cursing me with those eyes each time she cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although she must, one time, have cried like that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And been the object of as wild a cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so far back⁠—and on⁠—and always that,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The linked, the agonizing chain of cries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brighter than steel, because earth will be earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sun strike it, and the seed have force.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet no cry has touched me like this cry.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Harriet’s right and Harriet’s upstairs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Harriet would have kept her from today,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now today has come, I look at it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the icicle, and wish it gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because it hurts me to be sitting here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Biting my fingers at my daughter’s cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knowing Harriet has the harder task</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As she has had for nearly twenty years.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And yet, what I have sought that I have sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cannot disavouch for my own pang,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or be another father to the girl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than he who let her run the woods alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looking for stones that have no business there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Harriet sees a dozen kinds of pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some are blessed, being legitimate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some are cursed, being outside a law:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But she and I see only pain itself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And are hard-hearted with our epitaphs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet I wish I could not hear that cry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know that it will pass because all things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pass but the search that only ends with breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, even after that, my daughter and I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May still get up from bondage, being such</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smoke as no chain of steel-bright cries can chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To walk like Indian Summer through the woods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And be the solitaries of the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till we are sleepy as old clouds at last.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She has a lover and will have a child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I’m alone. I had forgotten that,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though you’d not think it easy to forget.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>No, we’ll not go together.</span>
					<span>The cries beat</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like hail upon the cold panes of my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faster and faster, till they crack the glass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I can know at last how old I am.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That is my punishment and my defence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My ecstasy and my deep-seated bane.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I prayed to life for life once, in my youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the rain and a long stroke of cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till my soaked limbs felt common with the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the black stone of heaven swung aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a last clap of water, to reveal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lonely and timid, after all that wrath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The small, cold, perfect flower of the new moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now, perhaps, I’ll pray again tonight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still to the life that used me as a man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uses and wears a strong and riotous horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still to the vagrants of no fortunate word.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Men who go looking for the wilderness-stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eaters of life who run away from bread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And are not satisfied with lucky days!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Robbers of airy gold, skin-changing men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who find odd brothers when the moon is full,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stray alchemics who entertain an imp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And feed it plums within a hollow tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until its little belly is sufficed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men who have seen the bronze male-partridge beat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His drum of feathers not ten feet away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men who have listened to wild geese at night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until your hearts were hollowed with that sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moth-light and owl-light and first-dayspring men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seekers and seldom-finders of the woods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But always seekers till your eyes are shut;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have an elder daughter that I love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, having loved from childhood, would not tame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Because I once was tamed.</span>
					<span>If you’re my friends,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Then she’s your friend.</span>
					<span>I do not ask for her</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Refusal or compunction or the safe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Road between little houses and old gates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Death lies sleepy as a dog in the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the slow cows come home with evening bells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the tired peace that’s good for pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those who are never tired of eating life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must immolate themselves against a star</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sooner or late, as she turns crucified</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, on that flagellating wheel of light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which will not miss one revolution’s turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For any anguish we can bring to it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because it is our master and our stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Body of pain, body of sharpened fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Body of quenchless life, itself, itself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That safety cannot buy or peddlers sell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the rich cowards leave their silly sons.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, oh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She’s tired out, she’s broken, she’s athirst.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrap her in twilights now, she is so torn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mask again the cold, sweat-runnelled mask</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the deep silence of a leafy wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So cool and dim its birds are all asleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And will not fret her. Wipe her straining hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the soft, gleaming cobwebs April spins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of bright silver tears and spider silk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till they are finer than the handkerchiefs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a young, wild, spear-bearing fairy-queen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soothe her and comfort her and let her hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No harshness but the mumbling peaceful sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fed bee grumbles to his honey-bags</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>In the red foxglove’s throat.</span>
					<span>Oh, if you are</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anything but lost shadows, go to her!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Melora did not make such words for herself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being unable, and too much in pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If wood-things were beside her, she did not see them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But only a lamp, and hands.</span>
					<span>The pains came hard now,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fist that hardly opened before it shut,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A red stair mounting into an ultimate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flurry of misty conflict, when it seemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if she fought against the earth itself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For mere breath and something other than mere breath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She heard the roar of the tunnel, drowned in earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth and its expulsive waters, tearing her, being born.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then it was yellow silence and a weak crying.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>After the child was washed, they showed her the child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breakable, crumpled, breathing, swathed and indignant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all its nails and hands that moved of themselves⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A queer thing to come out of that, but then it was there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Looks healthy enough,” said her mother in a tired voice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Melora stared. “He’s got blue eyes,” she said finally.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her mother sniffed. “A lot of ’em start out blue.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She looked at the child as if she wanted to tell it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“You aren’t respectable. What are you doing here?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the child began wailing. She rocked it mechanically.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The rain kept on through the night but nobody listened.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The parents talked for a while, then they fell asleep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even the new child slept with its fists tight shut.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Melora heard the rain for a single moment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then deep, beautiful nothing. “Over,” she thought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She slept, handfasted to the wilderness-stone.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Now the earth begins to roll its wheel toward the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The deep mud-gullies are drying.</span>
					<span>The sluggish armies</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That have slept the bear-months through in their winter-camps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Begin to stir and be restless.</span>
					<span>They’re tired enough</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of leaky huts and the rain and punishment-drill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They haven’t forgotten what it was like last time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But next time we’ll lick ’em, next time it won’t be so bad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somehow we won’t get killed, we won’t march so hard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“These huts looked pretty good when we first hit camp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they look sort of lousy now⁠—we might as well git⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fight the Rebs⁠—and the Yanks⁠—and finish it up.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So they think in the bored, skin-itching months</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the roads are drying. “We’re sick of this crummy place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We might as well git, it doesn’t much matter where.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when they git, they are cross at leaving the huts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“We fixed up ours first rate. We had regular lamps.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We knew the girls at the Depot. It wasn’t so bad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why the hell do we have to git when we just got fixed?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Oh, well, we might as well travel.”</span>
					<span>So they go on,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The huts drop behind, the dry road opens ahead.⁠ ⁠…</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fighting Joe Hooker feels good when he looks at his men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A blue-eyed, uncomplex man with a gift for phrase.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The finest army on the planet,” he says.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The phrase is to turn against him with other phrases</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he is beaten⁠—but now he is confident.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tall, sandy, active, sentimental and tart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His horseman’s shoulder is not yet bowed by the weight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of knowing the dice are his and the cast of them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weight of command, the weight of Lee’s ghostly name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He rides, preparing his fate.</span>
					<span>In the other camps,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lee writes letters, is glad to get buttermilk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrings food and shoes and clothes from his commissariat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trusts in God and whets a knife on a stone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jackson plays with his new-born daughter, waiting for Spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His rare laugh clangs as he talks to his wife and child.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He is looking well. War always agrees with him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this, perhaps, is the happiest time of his life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He has three months of it left.</span>
					<span>By the swollen flood</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Mississippi, stumpy Grant is a mole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gnawing at Vicksburg. He has been blocked four times</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he will carry that beaver-dam at last.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is no brilliant lamp in that dogged mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And no conceit of brilliance to shake the hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But hand and mind can use the tools that they get.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>This long way out of Galena.</span>
					<span>Sherman is there</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Sherman loves him and finds him hard to make out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Sherman’s impatient fashion⁠—the quick, sharp man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeing ten thousand things where the slow sees one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet with a sort of younger brother awe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the infinite persistence of that slow will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—They make a good pair of hunting dogs, Grant and Sherman,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nervous, explosive, passionate, slashing hound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the quiet, equable, deadly holder-on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faded-brown as a cinnamon-bear in Spring⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See them like that, the brown dog and the white dog,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calling them back and forth through the scrubby woods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the little white scut of Victory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or see them as elder brother and younger brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But remember this. In their time they were famous men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet they were not jealous, one of the other.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the gold has peeled from the man on the gilded horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Riding Fifth Avenue, and the palm-girl’s blind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the big round tomb gapes empty under the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vacant with summer air, when it’s all forgotten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When nobody reads the books, when the flags are moth-dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Write up that. You won’t have to write it so often.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It will do as well as the railway-station tombs.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So with the troops and the leaders of the bear-armies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The front-page-newspaper-things.</span>
					<span>Tall Lincoln reviews</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Endless columns crunching across new snow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They pass uncheering at the marching-salute.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lincoln sits on his horse with his farmer’s seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watching the eyes go by and the eyes come on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gaunt, long body is dressed in its Sunday black,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gaunt face, strange as an omen, sad and foreboding.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eyes look at him, he looks back at the eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They pass and pass. They go back to their camps at last.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“So that was him,” they say. “So that’s the old man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’m glad we saw him. He isn’t so much on looks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he looks like people you know. He looks sad all right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I never saw nobody look quite as sad as that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without it made you feel foolish. He don’t do that.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He makes you feel⁠—I dunno⁠—I’m glad we could see him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was glad to see us but you could tell all the same</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This war’s plumb killin’ him. You can tell by his face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I never saw such a look on any man’s face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I guess it’s tough for him. Well, we saw him, for once.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That day in Richmond, a mob of angry women</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swarm in the streets and riot for bread or peace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They loot some shops, a few for the bread they need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A few for thieving, most because they are moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By discontent and hunger to do as the rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The troops are called out. The troops are about to fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Davis gets on a wagon and calms the crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the tumbled bodies clutter the street.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He never did a better thing with his voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it should be told. Next day they riot again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But this time the fire is weaker. They are dispersed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A few arrested. Bread grows dearer than ever.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The housewives still go out with their market-baskets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But coffee’s four dollars a pound and tea eleven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They come back with a scraping of this and a scrap of that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And try to remember old lazy, lagniappe days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slew-foot negro chanting his devilled crabs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the street, and the market-women piling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wicker baskets with everything good and fresh;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Topping it off with a great green fist of parsley</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That you used to pretty the sides of the serving-dish</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And never bothered to eat.</span>
					<span>They improvise dishes,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Blockade pudding”⁠ ⁠… “Confederate fricassee,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Serve hominy grits on the Royal Derby china</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laugh or weep in their cups of willow-bark tea.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Davis goes back from the riot, his shoulders stooped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glow of speech has left him and he feels cold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He eats a scant meal quickly and turns to the endless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Papers piled on his desk, the squabbles and plans,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A haggard dictator, fretting the men he rules</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And being fretted by them.</span>
					<span>He dreams, perhaps,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of old days, riding wild horses beside his wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back in his youth, on a Mississippi road.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That was a good time. It is past. He drowns in his papers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The curtain is going up on that battlesmoked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crowded third act which is to decide this war</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And yet not end it for years.</span>
					<span>Turn your eyes away</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From these chiefs and captains, put them back in their books.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the armies sleep like bears in a hollow cave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>War is an iron screen in front of a time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pictures smoked upon it in red and black,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some gallant enough, some deadly, but all intense.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We look at the pictures, thinking we know the time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>We only know the screen.</span>
					<span>Look behind it now</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the great parti-colored quilt of these patchwork States.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This part and that is vexed by a battle-worm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the ploughs go ahead, the factory chimneys smoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A new age curdles and boils in a hot steel caldron</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pours into rails and wheels and fingers of steel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steel is being born like a white-hot rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>In the dark smoke-cradle of Pittsburg⁠—</span>
					<span>a man with a crude</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eye of metal and crystal looks at a smear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>On a thin glass plate and wonders⁠—</span>
					<span>a shawled old woman</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sits on a curbstone calling the evening news.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>War, to her, is a good day when papers sell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or a bad day when papers don’t. War is fat black type.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Anything’s realer than war.</span>
					<span>By Omaha</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The valleys and gorges are white with the covered wagons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moving out toward the West and the new, free land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>All through the war they go on.</span>
					<span>Five thousand teams</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pass Laramie in a month in the last war-year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draft-evaders, homesteaders, pioneers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old soldiers, Southern emigrants, sunburnt children.⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men are founding colleges, finding gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Selling bad beef to the army and making fortunes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ploughing the stone-cropped field that their fathers ploughed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>(Anything’s realer than war.)</span>
					<span>A moth of a woman,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shut in a garden, lives on scraps of Eternity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a dog, a procession of sunsets and certain poems</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She scribbles on bits of paper. Such poems may be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ice-crystals, rubies cracked with refracted light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or all vast death like a wide field in ten short lines.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She writes to the tough, swart-minded Higginson</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Minding his negro troops in a lost bayou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“War feels to me like an oblique place.”</span>
					<span>A man</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dreams of a sky machine that will match the birds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And another, dusting the shelves of a country store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saves his pennies until they turn into dimes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>(Anything’s realer than war.)</span>
					<span>A dozen men</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Charter a railroad to go all across the Plains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And link two seas with a whistling iron horse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A whiskered doctor stubbornly tries to find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The causes of childbed-fever⁠—and, doing so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will save more lives than all these war-months have spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never inhabit a railway-station tomb.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All this through the war, all this behind the flat screen.⁠ ⁠…</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i5">I heard the song of breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Go up from city and country,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The even breath of the sleeper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The tired breath of the sick,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The dry cough in the throat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Of the man with the death-sweat on him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">And the quiet monotone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">We breathe but do not hear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i5">The harsh gasp of the runner,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The long sigh of power</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Heaving the weight aloft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The grey breath of the old.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Men at the end of strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">With their lungs turned lead and fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Panting like thirsty dogs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">A child’s breath, blowing a flame.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i5">The breath that is the voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The silver, the woodwinds speaking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The dear voice of your lover,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The hard voice of your foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">And the vast breath of wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Mysterious over mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Caught in pines like a bird</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Or filling all hammered heaven.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i5">I heard the song of breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Like a great strand of music,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Blown between void and void,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Uncorporal as the light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The breath of nations asleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">And the piled hills they sleep in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The word that never was flesh</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">And yet is nothing but life.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i5">What are you, bodiless sibyl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Unseen except as the frost-cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Puffed from a silver mouth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">When the hard winter’s cold?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">We cannot live without breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">And yet we breathe without knowledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">And the vast strand of sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Goes on, eternally sighing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Without dimension or space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Without beginning or end.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i5">I heard the song of breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">And lost it in all sharp voices,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Even my own voice lost</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Like a thread in that huge strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Lost like a skein of air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">And with it, continents lost</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">In the great throat of Death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">I trembled, asking in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Whence come you, whither art gone?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The continents flow and melt</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Like wax in the naked candle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Burnt by the wick of time⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Where is the breath of the Chaldees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The dark, Minoan breath?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">I said to myself in hate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Hearing that mighty rushing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Though you raise a new Adam up</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">And blow fresh fire in his visage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">He has only a loan of air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">And gets but a breathing-space.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">But then I was quieted.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i5">I heard the song of breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The gulf hollow with voices,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Fused into one slow voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">That never paused or was faint.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Man, breathing his life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">And with him all life breathing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The young horse and the snake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Beetle, lion and dove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Solemn harps of the fir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Trumpets of sea and whirlwind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">And the vast, tiny grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Blown by a breath and speaking.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">I heard these things. I heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">The multitudinous river.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">When I came back to my life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">My voice was numb in my ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">I wondered that I still breathed.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Sophy, scared chambermaid in Pollet’s Hotel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned the cornhusk mattress and plumped the pillow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>With slipshod hands.</span>
					<span>Then she picked the pillow up</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And sniffed it greedily.</span>
					<span>Something in it smelt sweet.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bright, gold lady had slept there the night before⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, her lovely, lovely clothes! and the little green bottle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That breathed out flowers when you crept into the room</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pulled out the silver stopper just far enough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To get the sweetness, not far enough to be caught</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>If anyone came.</span>
					<span>It made her thin elbows ache</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To think how fine and golden the lady was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how sweet she smelled, how sweet she looked at the men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>How they looked at her.</span>
					<span>“I’d like to smell sweet,” she thought,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“Smell like a lady.”</span>
					<span>She put the hard pillow back.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lady and the green bottle had gone away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—If only you had clever hands⁠—after the next sleeper⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—You could steal green bottles⁠—the room would smell stale again⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hide it somewhere under your dress⁠—as it always did⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stale cigars and tired bodies⁠—or even say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When they reached to give you the tip, “Don’t give me a tip,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just give me”⁠—unwashed men with their six-weeks’ beards,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trying to hold you back when⁠—“that little green bottle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I want it so.”⁠—but the lady would never do it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ladies named Lucy. Lucy was a good name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flower-smelling. Sophy was just a name.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She took up her broom and swept ineffectively,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Thinking dim thoughts.</span>
					<span>The ladies named Lucy came,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes, in the winter, and then all the men got shaved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you could look through the door at the people dancing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when battles drew near, the ladies went home to stay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was right they should. War wasn’t a thing for ladies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>War was an endless procession of dirty boots.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filling pitchers and emptying out the slops,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And making the cornhusk beds for the unshaved men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who came in tired⁠—but never too tired to wonder⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look in the eyes⁠—and hands⁠—and suppose you didn’t,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They didn’t like it⁠—and if you did, it was nothing⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they always⁠—and rough sometimes⁠—and drunk now and then⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a couple of nice ones⁠—well, it didn’t mean nothing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was merely hard to carry the heavy pails</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When you didn’t get fed enough and got up so soon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, now the army was moving, there wouldn’t be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many men or beds or slops for a while</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And that meant something.</span>
					<span>She sighed and dabbed with her broom.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Shippy, the little man with the sharp rat-eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came behind her and put his hands on her waist.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She let him turn her around. He held her awhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While his eyes tried to look at her and over his shoulder</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>At once and couldn’t.</span>
					<span>She felt his poor body shake</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But she didn’t think much about it.</span>
					<span>He murmured something.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She shook her head with the air of a frightened doll</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And he let her go.</span>
					<span>“Well, I got to go anyway,”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said, in a gloomy voice. “I’m late as it is,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I thought that maybe⁠—” He let the sentence trail off.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What do you want, next time I come back?” he said.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Her face was sharper. “You bring me a bottle, Charley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The kind that lady had, with the Richmond scent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Hers has got a big silver stopper.”</span>
					<span>He pursed his mouth.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I don’t know,” he said. “I’ll try. I’d like to all right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You be a good girl now, Soph. Do you love me, Sophy?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Uh-huh,” she said, in a tired voice, thinking of pitchers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Well, I⁠—you’re a good girl, Soph.” He held her again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I’m late,” he muttered. She looked at him and felt mean.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was skimpy like her. They ought to be nice to each other.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She didn’t like him much but she sort of loved him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“You be a good girl till Charley comes back,” he mumbled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kissing her nervously. “I’ll bring you the scent.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“It’s got a name called French Lilies,” she said “Oh, Charley!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They clung together a moment like mournful shadows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was crying a little, the wet tears fell on her chin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She cried herself when he’d gone, she didn’t know why,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when she thought of the scent with the silver stopper</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She felt more happy. She went to make the next bed.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Luke Breckenridge, washing his shirt in a muddy pool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Chewed on a sour thought.</span>
					<span>Only yesterday</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had seen the team creak by toward Pollet’s Hotel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With that damn little rat-eyed peddler driving his mules</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>As if he was God Almighty.</span>
					<span>He conjured up</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shadow-Shippy before him to hate and bruise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>As he beat his shirt with a stone.</span>
					<span>“If we-uns was home,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I could just lay for him and shoot him out of the bresh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goin’ to see my girl with his lousy mules.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tryin’ to steal my girl with his peddler’s talk!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But here, in the war, you could only shoot at the Yanks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If you shot other folks, they found out about it and shot you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just like you was a spyer or something mean</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Instead of a soldier. There wasn’t no sense to it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Teach him to steal my girl⁠—if I had him home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back in the mountains⁠—I told her straight the last time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You be a good girl, Soph, and I’ll buy you a dress⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We can fix the cabin up fine⁠—and if we have kids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’ll get ourselves married. Couldn’t talk fairer than that,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she’s a good girl⁠—but women’s easy to change⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God-damn peddler, givin’ her Richmond trash,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we-uns movin’ away to scrimmage the Yanks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before I git a chance to see her agin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And find out if she’s been good⁠—He’ll come back this way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drivin’ his mules⁠—plumb easy to lay for him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But they’d catch me, shore.”</span>
					<span>His mouth had a bitter twist,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His slow mind grubbed for a plan to settle his doubts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last he dropped his stone with a joyous whoop.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hey, Billy,” he called to his neighbor. “Got your shirt dry?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well, lend it here for a piece until mine’s wrung out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>I got to go see the Captain.”</span>
					<span>Billy demurred.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I got friends enough in this shirt,” he said with a drawl.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I ain’t hankerin’ after no visitors out of yours.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’m a modest man and my crawlies is sort of shy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They don’t mix well with strangers. They’s Piedmont crawlies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Besides, this shirt, she’s still got more shirt than hole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Yours ain’t a shirt⁠—it’s a doughnut.”</span>
					<span>They swore for a while</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But finally Luke went off with the precious shirt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whistling the tuneless snatch of a mountain jig,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Gawd help you, peddler,” he thought, as he looked for the Captain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Shippy drove his rattletrap cart along</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the dusty evening, worried and ill at ease.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He ought to have taken the other road by the creek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he’d wasted too much time at Pollet’s Hotel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looking for Sophy⁠—and hardly seen her at that⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And now she wanted a bottle of scent.</span>
					<span>His soul</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shivered with fear like a thin dog in the cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raging in vain at the terrible thing called Life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—There must be a corner somewhere where you could creep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Curl up soft and be warm⁠—but he’d never found it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The big boys always stole his lunch at the school</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rubbed his nose in the dirt⁠—and when he grew up</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>It was just the same.</span>
					<span>There was something under his face,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something that said, “Come, bully me⁠—I won’t bite.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He couldn’t see it himself, but it must be there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was always going places and thinking, “This time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They won’t find out.” But they always did find out</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>After a while.</span>
					<span>It had been that way at the store,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That way in the army, that way now as a spy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind his eyes he built up a super-Shippy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who ordered people around, loved glittering girls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Threw out his chest and died for a bloody flag</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then revived to be thanked by gilt generals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A schoolboy Shippy, eating the big boys’ lunch.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was his totem. He visioned that Shippy now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reckless Shippy with papers sewed in his boots,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slyly carrying fate through the Rebel lines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To some bright place where⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i15">The off mule stumbled and brayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He cursed it whimperingly and jerked at the reins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While his heart jerked, too. The super-Shippy was gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was alone and scared and late on the road.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My God, but he was scared of being a spy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the mute-faced woman in Richmond and war and life!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had some papers sewn in his boots all right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they’d look at the papers while he stood sweating before them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crumple them up and bully him with cross speech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Couldn’t you even find out where Heth’s men are?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can’t you draw a map? You don’t know about Stonewall Jackson?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why don’t you know it? What’s this ford by the church?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My God, man, what do you think you are out there for?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’ll have to do better next time, I can tell you that.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’ll send you over Route 7. We had a man there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But he’s been reported killed⁠—”</span>
					<span>He shuddered in vain,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeing a rope and a tree and a dangling weight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the mute-faced woman sending a paper off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In somebody’s else’s boots, and somebody saying</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In an ice-cream voice to another scared little man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Next time, you’ll try Route 7. We had a man there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But he’s been reported killed⁠—”</span>
					<span>Oh, there is a hole</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somewhere deep in the ground where the rabbits hide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But I’ve never found it⁠—</span>
					<span>They stuck up signs and a flag</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it was war and you went and got scared to death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the roar and the yells and the people trying to kill you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till anything else seemed better⁠—and there you were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Driving mules with papers sewn in your boots,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But people still wanting to kill you⁠—and no way out.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If you deserted, the mute-faced woman would know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that would be the worst⁠—and if you went back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It would be Bull Run and yelling and all that blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When it made you sick to your stomach. Even at school</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You always had to fight. There was no way out.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sophy was sweet and Sophy was a good girl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Sophy was the warm earth where the rabbits hide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away from danger, letting their hearts go slow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But you couldn’t stay with Sophy, you couldn’t stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And she’d say she’d be a good girl⁠—</span>
					<span>but, in spite of himself,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw a big boy tearing a cardboard box</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apart, with greedy hands, in a bare school-yard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Where a Shippy whimpered⁠—</span>
					<span>“Oh, Soph, I’ll get you the scent,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honest I will! Oh God, just let me get through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just this one time⁠—and I’ll pray⁠—I’ll be good⁠—oh God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make these papers something they want!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i22">He clucked to his mules.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another mile and he’d be out on the pike</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And pretty safe for a while.</span>
					<span>His spirit returned</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To building the super-Shippy from dust again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His head began to nod with the sway of the cart.⁠ ⁠…</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Half a dozen men rode out from a little clearing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And casually blocked the road. He pulled up his mules,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Staring around. He saw a face that he knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now queer with triumph⁠—Sophy filling a pail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that gangling fellow lounging against the pump,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Hungry-eyed⁠—</span>
					<span>It happened too fast to be scary.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You got stopped such a lot. It was only some new patrol.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“All the boys know me,” he said. “Yes, I got my pass.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They took the pass but they did not give it back.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was a waver shaking the dusty air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The feel of a cord grown tauter. How dry his throat was!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’d be driving on in a minute. “Well boys?” he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“Well, fellers?”</span>
					<span>They didn’t answer or look at him.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I tell you that’s the man,” said the mountaineer.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The sergeant-feller looked dubiously at the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gentlemanly he looked like, a nice young feller</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his little black moustache and his thin, brown face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wouldn’t do anything mean. It would be all right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another man was paring his nails with a knife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His face was merry and reckless⁠—nice feller, too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feller to stand you a drink and talk gay with the girls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not anybody to hurt you or twist your wrist.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were all nice fellers except for the mountaineer.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They were searching him now, but they didn’t do it mean.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He babbled to them all through it.</span>
					<span>“Now boys, now boys,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’re making a big mistake, boys. They all know me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>They all know Charley the peddler.”</span>
					<span>The sergeant looked</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disgusted now⁠—wonder why. Go ahead and look,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’ll never find it⁠—Sophy⁠—bottle of scent⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A horrible voice was saying, “Pull off his boots,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fought like a frightened rat then, weeping and biting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they got him down and found the papers all right.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Luke Breckenridge observed them with startled eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Christ,” he thought, “so the skunk’s a spy after all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well, I told ’em so⁠—but I didn’t reckon he was.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Little feist of a peddler, chasin’ my girl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wanted to scare him off so he wouldn’t come back⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hell, they ought to make me a corporal now.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He was pleased.</span>
					<span>Clay Wingate looked at the writhing man,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Get up!” he said, in a hard voice, feeling sick.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they had to drag it up before it would stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And even then it still babbled.</span>
					<span>His throat was dry</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that was all right⁠—it was going to be all right⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was alive⁠—he was Shippy⁠—he knew a girl⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was going to buy her a bottle of first-class scent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It couldn’t all stop. He wasn’t ready to die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was willing enough to be friends and call it a joke.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let them take the mules and the cart and hurt him a lot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only not that⁠—it was other spies who were hung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not himself, not Shippy, not the body he knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the live blood running through it, making it warm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was real. He wore clothes. He could make all this go away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If he shut his eyes. They’d turn him loose in a minute.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were all nice fellers. They wouldn’t treat a man mean.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>They couldn’t be going to hang him.</span>
					<span>But they were.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Lucy Weatherby spread out gowns on a bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wondered which she could wear to the next levee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blue was faded, the rose brocade had a tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She’d worn the flowered satin a dozen times,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The apricot had never gone with her hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And somebody had to look nice at the evening parties.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it was hard. The blockade runners of course⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But so few of them had space for gowns any more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And, really, they charged such prices!</span>
					<span>Of course it is</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The war, and, of course, when one thinks of our dear, brave boys⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, nevertheless, they like a girl to look fresh</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>When they come back from their fighting.</span>
					<span>When one goes up</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the winter-camps, it doesn’t matter so much,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Any old rag will do for that sort of thing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But here, in Richmond⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<span>She pondered, mentally stitching,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cutting and shaping, lost in a pleasant dream.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fighting at Chancellorsville and Hooker beaten</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nobody killed that you knew so terribly well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except Jo Frear’s second brother⁠—though it was sad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our splendid general Jackson’s lost his arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Such an odd man but so religious.</span>
					<span>She hummed a moment</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That’s Stonewall Jackson’s way” in her clear cool voice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I really should have trained for nursing,” she thought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She heard a voice say, “Yes, the General’s very ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that lovely new nurse will save him if anyone can.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>She came out from Richmond on purpose.”</span>
					<span>The voice stopped speaking.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She thought of last month and the boys and the Black Horse Troop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the haggard little room in Pollet’s Hotel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose slipshod chambermaid had such scared, round eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She was just as glad they were fighting now, after all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Huger had been so jealous and Clay so wild,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was quite a strain to be engaged to them both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Especially when Jim Merrihew kept on writing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And that nice Alabama major⁠—</span>
					<span>She heard the bells</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ring for a wedding⁠—but who was the man beside her?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had a face made up of too many faces.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And yet, a young girl must marry⁠—</span>
					<span>You may dance,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Play in the sun and wear bright gowns to levees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But soon or late, the hands unlike to your hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But rough and seeking, will catch your lightness at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with strange passion force you. What is this passion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This injury that women must bear for gowns?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It does not move me or stir me. I will not bear it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are women enough to bear it. If I have sweetness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is for another service. It is my own.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will not share it. I’ll play in the heat of the sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet, young girls must marry⁠—what am I thinking?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She stepped from her hoops to try on the rose brocade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But let it lie for a moment, while she stood up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To look at the bright ghost-girl in the long dark mirror,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Adoringly.</span>
					<span>“Oh, you honey,” she thought. “You honey!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You look so pretty⁠—and nobody knows but me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Nobody knows.”</span>
					<span>She kissed her little white shoulders,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fierce and pitying love for their shining whiteness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So soft, so smooth, so untarnished, so honey-sweet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her eyes were veiled. She swayed in front of the mirror.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Honey, I love you,” she whispered, “I love you, honey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nobody loves you like I do, do they, sugar?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nobody knows but Lucy how sweet you are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You mustn’t get married, honey. You mustn’t leave me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’ll be pretty and sweet to all of them, won’t we, honey?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’ll always have beaus to dance with and tunes to dance to,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But you mustn’t leave me, honey. I couldn’t bear it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You mustn’t ever leave me for any man.”</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>In the dense heart of the thicketed Wilderness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stonewall Jackson lies dying for four long days.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They have cut off his arm, they have tried such arts as they know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But no arts now can save him.</span>
					<span>When he was hit</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the blind chance bullet-spatter from his own lines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the night, in the darkness, they stole him off from the field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To keep the men from knowing, but the men knew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dogs in the house will know when there’s something wrong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>You do not have to tell them.</span>
					<span>He marched his men</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That grim first day across the whole Union front</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To strike a sleepy right wing with a sudden stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And roll it up⁠—it was his old trick of war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Lee and he could play like finger and thumb!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>It was the last time they played so.</span>
					<span>When the blue-coated</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unprepared ranks of Howard saw that storm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heralded by wild rabbits and frightened deer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burst on them yelling, out of the whispering woods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They could not face it. Some men died where they stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The storm passed over the rest. It was Jackson’s storm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was his old trick of war, for the last time played.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He must have known it. He loosed it and drove it on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hearing the long yell shake like an Indian cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the dense black oaks, the clumps of second-growth pine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the red flags reel ahead through the underbrush.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was the hour he did not stop to taste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being himself. He saw it and found it good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But night was falling, the Union centre still held,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another attack would end it. He pressed ahead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the dusk, pushing Little Sorrel, as if the horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were iron, and he were iron, and all his men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not men but iron, the stalks of an iron broom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweeping a dirt floor clean⁠—and yet, as he rode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A canny captain, planning a ruthless chess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Skilfully as night fell. The night fell too soon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is hard to tell your friend from your enemy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In such a night. So he rode too far in advance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, turning back toward his lines, unrecognized,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was fired upon in the night, in the stumbling darkness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By his own men. He had ridden such rides before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often enough and taken the chance of them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But this chance was his bane.</span>
					<span>He lay on the bed</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the arm had been lopped from him, grim and silent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Refusing importunate Death with terrible eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Death was a servant and Death was a sulky dog</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Death crouched down by the Lord in the Lord’s own time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he still had work to finish that Death would spoil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He would live in spite of that servant.</span>
					<span>Now and then</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spoke, with the old curt justice that never once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Denied himself or his foe or any other</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rigid due they deserved, as he saw that due.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spoke of himself and his storm. “A successful movement.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I think the most successful I ever made.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—He had heard that long yell shake like an Indian cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the ragged woods and seen his flags go ahead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Later on, they brought him a stately letter from Lee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That said in Lee’s gracious way, “You have only lost</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Your left arm, I my right.”</span>
					<span>The dour mouth opened.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Better ten Jacksons should fall than one Lee,” it said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And closed again, while the heart went on with its task</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of beating off foolish, unnecessary Death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The slow time wore. They had to tell him at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he must die. The doctors were brave enough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No doubt, but they looked awhile at the man on the bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And summoned his wife to do it. So she told him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He would not believe at first. Then he lay awhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent, while some slow, vast reversal of skies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went on in the dying brain. At last he spoke.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“All right,” he said.</span>
					<span>She opened the Bible and read.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was Spring outside the window, the air was warm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rough, plank house was full enough of the Spring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They had had a good life together, those two middle-aged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calm people, one reading aloud now, the other silent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They had passed hard schools. They were in love with each other</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And had been for many years. Now that tale was told.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They had been poor and odd, found each other trusty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Begotten children, prayed, disliked to be parted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had family-jokes, known weather and other matters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Planned for an age: they were famous now, he was dying.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The clock moved on, the delirium began.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The watchers listened, trying to catch the words;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some awed, one broken-hearted, a few, no doubt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not glad to be there precisely, but in a way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glad that, if it must happen, they could be there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>It is a human emotion.</span>
					<span>The dying man</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went back at first to his battles, as soldiers do.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was pushing a new advance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the old impatience and skill, over tangled ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cloudy drive that did not move as he willed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though he had it clear in his mind. They were slow today.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Tell A. P. Hill to push them⁠—push the attack⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Get up the guns!”</span>
					<span>The cloudy assault dispersed.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There were no more cannon. The ground was plain enough now.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He lay silent, seeing it so, while the watchers listened.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had been dying once, but that was a dream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ground was plain enough now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He roused himself and spoke in a different voice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Let us cross the river,” he said, “and rest under the shade of the trees.”</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
