<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-7" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>They came on to fish-hook Gettysburg in this way, after this fashion.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over hot pikes heavy with pollen, past fields where the wheat was high.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peaches grew in the orchards; it was a fertile country,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full of red barns and fresh springs and dun, deep-uddered kine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A farmer lived with a clear stream that ran through his very house-room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They cooled the butter in it and the milk, in their wide, stone jars;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dusty Georgian came there, to eat and go on to battle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They dipped the milk from the jars, it was cold and sweet in his mouth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He heard the clear stream’s music as the German housewife served him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remembering the Shenandoah and a stream poured from a rock;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He ate and drank and went on to the gunwheels crushing the harvest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was a thing he remembered as long as any guns.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Country of broad-backed horses, stone houses and long, green meadows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Getty came with his ox-team to found a steady town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the little trains of my boyhood puffed solemnly up the Valley</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Past the market-squares and the lindens and the Quaker meeting-house.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Penn stood under his oak with a painted sachem beside him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The market-women sold scrapple when the first red maples turned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the buckeyes slipped from their sheaths, you could gather a pile of buckeyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Red-brown as old polished boots, good to touch and hold in the hand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The ice-cream parlor was papered with scenes from <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Paul and Virginia</i>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pigs were fat all year, you could stand a spoon in the cream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—Penn stood under his oak with a feathered pipe in his fingers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyes were quiet with God, but his wits and his bargain sharp.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So I remember it all, and the light sound of buckeyes falling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the worn rose-bricks of the pavement, herring-boned, trodden for years;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great yellow shocks of wheat and the dust-white road through summer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, in Fall, the green walnut shells, and the stain they left for a while.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So I remember you, ripe country of broad-backed horses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Valley of cold, sweet springs and dairies with limestone-floors;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so they found you that year, when they scared your cows with their cannon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the strange South moved against you, lean marchers lost in the corn.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Two months have passed since Jackson died in the woods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they brought his body back to the Richmond State House</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lie there, heaped with flowers, while the bells tolled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Two months of feints and waiting.</span>
					<span>And now, at length,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The South goes north again in the second raid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>In the last cast for fortune.</span>
					<span>A two-edged chance</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet a chance that may burnish a failing star;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For now, on the wide expanse of the Western board,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strong pieces that fought for the South have been swept away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Or penned up in hollow Vicksburg.</span>
					<span>One cool Spring night</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Porter’s ironclads run the shore-batteries</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Through a velvet stabbed with hot flashes.</span>
					<span>Grant lands his men,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drives the relieving force of Johnston away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sits at last in front of the hollow town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a huge brown bear on its haunches, terribly waiting.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His guns begin to peck at the pillared porches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sleepy, sun-spattered streets. His siege has begun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Forty-eight days that siege and those guns go on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a slow hand closing around a hungry throat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Ever more hungry.</span>
					<span>The hunger of hollow towns,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hunger of sieges, the hunger of lost hope.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As day goes by after day and the shells still whine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the town is a great mole-burrow of pits and caves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the thin women hide their children, where the tired men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burrow away from the death that falls from the air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the common sky turned hostile⁠—and still no hope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still no sight in the sky when the morning breaks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the brown bear there on his haunches, steadfastly waiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting like Time for the honey-tree to fall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The news creeps back to the watchers oversea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They ponder on it, aloof and irresolute</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The balance they watch is dipping against the South.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It will take great strokes to redress that balance again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There will be one more moment of shaken scales</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the Laird rams almost alter the scheme of things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But it is distant.</span>
					<span>The watchers stare at the board</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting a surer omen then Chancellorsville</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or any battle won on a Southern ground.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lee sees that dip of the balance and so prepares</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His cast for the surer omen and his last stroke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the steel-bossed Northern shield. Once before he tried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That spear-rush North and was halted. It was a chance.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is a chance. He weighs the chance in his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Like a stone, reflecting.</span>
					<span>Four years from Harper’s Ferry</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two years since the First Manassas⁠—and this last year</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stroke after stroke successful⁠—but still no end.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He is a man with a knotty club in his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beating off bulls from the breaks in a pasture fence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he has beaten them back at each fresh assault,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>McClellan⁠—Burnside⁠—Hooker at Chancellorsville⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pope at the Second Manassas⁠—Banks in the Valley⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the pasture is trampled; his army needs new pasture.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An army moves like a locust, eating the grain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this grain is well-nigh eaten. He cannot mend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The breaks in his fence with famine or starving hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if he waits the wheel of another year</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bulls will come back full-fed, shaking sharper horns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While he faces them empty, armed with a hunger-cracked</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Unmagic stick.</span>
					<span>There is only this thing to do,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To strike at the shield with the strength that he still can use</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hoping to burst it asunder with one stiff blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And carry the war up North, to the untouched fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where his tattered men can feed on the bulls’ own grain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Get shoes and clothes, take Washington if they can,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Hold the fighting-gauge in any event.</span>
					<span>He weighs</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chance in his hand. I think that he weighed it well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And felt a high-tide risen up in his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And in his men a high tide.</span>
					<span>They were veterans,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They had never been beaten wholly and blocked but once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had driven four Union armies within a year</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And broken three blue commanders from their command.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Even now they were fresh from triumph.</span>
					<span>He cast his stone</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clanging at fortune, and set his fate on the odds.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Lincoln hears the rumor in Washington.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>They are moving North.</span>
					<span>The Pennsylvania cities</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear it and shake, they are loose, they are moving North.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call up your shotgun-militia, bury your silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shoulder a gun or run away from the State,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>They are loose, they are moving.</span>
					<span>Fighting Joe Hooker has heard it,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He swings his army back across the Potomac,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rapidly planning, while Lee still visions him South.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stuart’s horse should have brought the news of that move</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Stuart is off on a last and luckless raid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far to the East, and the grey host moves without eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Through crucial days.</span>
					<span>They are in the Cumberland now,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taking minor towns, feeding fat for a little while,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pressing horses and shoes, paying out Confederate bills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To slow Dutch storekeepers who groan at the money.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are loose, they are in the North, they are here and there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Halleck rubs his elbows and wonders where,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lincoln is sleepless, the telegraph-sounders click</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>In the War Office day and night.</span>
					<span>There are lies and rumors,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are only a mile from Philadelphia now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are burning York⁠—they are marching on Baltimore⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile, Lee rides through the heart of the Cumberland.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A great hot sunset colors the marching men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Colors the horse and the sword and the bearded face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But cannot change that face from its strong repose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And⁠—miles away⁠—Joe Hooker, by telegraph</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calls for the garrison left at Harper’s Ferry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To join him. Elbow-rubbing Halleck refuses.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hooker resigns command⁠—and fades from the East</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To travel West, fight keenly at Lookout Mountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Follow Sherman’s march as far as Atlanta,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be ranked by Howard, and tartly resign once more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the end and the fame and the Grand Review,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To die a slow death, in bed, with his fire gone out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>A campfire quenched and forgotten.</span>
					<span>He deserved</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A better and brusquer end that marched with his nickname,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This disappointed, hot-tempered, most human man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who had such faith in himself except for once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the once, being Chancellorsville, wiped out the rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was often touchy and life was touchy with him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the last revenge was a trifle out of proportion.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such things will happen⁠—Jackson went in his strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stuart was riding his horse when the bullet took him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Custer died to the trumpet⁠—Dutch Longstreet lived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To quarrel and fight dead battles. Lee passed in silence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>McClellan talked on forever in word and print.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grant lived to be President. Thomas died sick at heart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Hooker goes from our picture⁠—and a spent aide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reaches Meade’s hut at three o’clock in the morning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wake him with unexpected news of command.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The thin Pennsylvanian puts on his spectacles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To read the order. Tall, sad-faced and austere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He has the sharp, long nose of a fighting-bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A prudent mouth and a cool, considering mind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An iron-gray man with none of Hooker’s panache,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But resolute and able, well skilled in war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They call him “the damned old goggle-eyed snapping-turtle”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At times, and he does not call out the idol-shout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he rides his lines, but his prudence is a hard prudence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And can last out storms that break the men with panache,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though it summons no counter-storm when the storm is done.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His sombre schoolmaster-eyes read the order well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>It is three days before the battle.</span>
					<span>He thinks at first</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a grand review, gives it up, and begins to act.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That morning a spy brings news to Lee in his tent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the Union army has moved and is on the march.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lee calls back Ewell and Early from their forays</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And summons his host together by the cross-roads</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Where Getty came with his ox-cart.</span>
					<span>So now we see</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These two crab-armies fumbling for each other,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if through a fog of rumor and false report,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These last two days of sleepy, hay-harvest June.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hot June lying asleep on a shock of wheat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the pollen-wind blows over the burnt-gold stubble</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the thirsty men march past, stirring thick grey dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the trodden pikes⁠—till at last, the crab-claws touch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Getty’s town, and clutch, and the peaches fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut by the bullets, splashing under the trees.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That meeting was not willed by a human mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>When we come to sift it.</span>
					<span>You say a fate rode a horse</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ahead of those lumbering hosts, and in either hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He carried a skein of omen. And when, at last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He came to a certain umbrella-copse of trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That never had heard a cannon or seen dead men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knotted the skeins together and flung them down</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>With a sound like metal.</span>
					<span>Perhaps. It may have been so.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that we know is⁠—Meade intended to fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some fifteen miles away on the Pipe Creek Line</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And where Lee meant to fight him, if forced to fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We do not know, but it was not there where they fought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet the riding fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blind and deaf and a doom on a lunging horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Threw down his skeins and gathered the battle there.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span class="i9">The buttercup-meadows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">Are very yellow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">A child comes there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">To fill her hands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">The gold she gathers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">Is soft and precious</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">As sweet new butter</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">Fresh from the churn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i9">She fills her frock</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">With the yellow flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">The butter she gathers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">Is smooth as gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">Little bright cups</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">Of new-churned sunshine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">For a well-behaved</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">Hoop-skirted doll.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i9">Her frock’s full</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">And her hands are mothy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">With yellow pollen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">But she keeps on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">Down by the fence</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">They are even thicker.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">She runs, bowed down with</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">Buttercup-gold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i9">She sees a road</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">And she sees a rider.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">His face is grey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">With a different dust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">He talks loud.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">He rattles like tinware.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">He has a long sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">To kill little girls.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i9">He shouts at her now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">But she does not answer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">“<em>Where is the town?</em>”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">But she will not hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">There are other riders</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">Jangling behind him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">“<em>We won’t hurt you, youngster!</em>”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">But they have swords.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i9">The buttercups fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">Like spilt butter.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">She runs away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">She runs to her house.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">She hides her face</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">In her mother’s apron</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">And tries to tell her</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i9">How dreadful it was.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Buford came to Gettysburg late that night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Riding West with his brigades of blue horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Pettigrew and his North Carolinians</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were moving East toward the town with a wagon-train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Hoping to capture shoes.</span>
					<span>The two came in touch.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pettigrew halted and waited for men and orders.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Buford threw out his pickets beyond the town.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The next morning was July first. It was hot and calm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the grey side, Heth’s division was ready to march</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drive the blue pickets in. There was still no thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a planned and decisive battle on either side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though Buford had seen the strength of those two hill-ridges</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon enough to be famous, and marked one down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a place to rally if he should be driven back.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He talks with his staff in front of a tavern now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An officer rides up from the near First Corps.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“What are you doing here, sir?”</span>
					<span>The officer</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Explains. He, too, has come there to look for shoes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—Fabulous shoes of Gettysburg, dead men’s shoes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did anyone ever wear you, when it was done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the men were gone, when the farms were spoiled with the bones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What became of your nails and leather? The swords went home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swords went into museums and neat glass cases,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swords look well there. They are clean from the war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You wouldn’t put old shoes in a neat glass case,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Still stuck with the mud of marching.</span>
					<span>And yet, a man</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a taste for such straws and fables, blown by the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might hide a pair in a labelled case sometime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just to see how the leather looked, set down by the swords.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The officer is hardly through with his tale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Buford orders him back to his command.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“Why, what is the matter, general?”</span>
					<span>As he speaks</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The far-off hollow slam of a single gun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breaks the warm stillness. The horses prick up their ears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That’s the matter,” says Buford and gallops away.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Jake Diefer, the barrel-chested Pennsylvanian,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marched toward Getty’s town past orderly fences,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Thinking of harvest.</span>
					<span>The boy was growing up strong</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the corn-haired woman was smart at managing things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it was a shame what you had to pay hired men now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though they’d had good crops last year and good prices too.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The crops looked pretty this summer.</span>
					<span>He stared at the long</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gold of the wheat reflectively, weighing it all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turning it into money and cows and taxes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A new horse-reaper, some first-class paint for the barn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Maybe a dress for the woman.</span>
					<span>His thoughts were few,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But this one tasted rough and good in his mouth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a spear of rough, raw grain. He crunched at it now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—And yet, that wasn’t all, the paint and the cash,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were the wheat but the wheat was⁠—he didn’t know⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it made you feel good to see some good wheat again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And see it grown up proper.</span>
					<span>He wasn’t a man</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To cut a slice of poetry from a farm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He liked the kind of manure that he knew about</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seldom burst into tears when his horses died</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or found a beautiful thought in a bumble-bee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now, as he tramped along like a laden steer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tall wheat, rustling, filled his heart with its sound.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Look at that column well, as it passes by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remembering Bull Run and the cocksfeather hats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The congressmen, the raw militia brigades</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who went to war with a flag and a haircloth trunk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In bright red pants and ideals and ignorance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ready to fight like picture-postcard boys</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While fighting still had banners and a sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And just as ready to run in blind mob-panic.⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These men were once those men. These men are the soldiers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good thieves, good fighters, excellent foragers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grumbling men who dislike to be killed in war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet will hold when the raw militia break</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And live where the raw militia needlessly die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Having been schooled to that end.</span>
					<span>The school is not</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pretty school. They wear no cocksfeather hats.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some men march in their drawers and their stocking feet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They have handkerchiefs round their heads, they are footsore and chafed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Their faces are sweaty leather.</span>
					<span>And when they pass</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The little towns where the people wish them godspeed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A few are touched by the cheers and the crying women</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But most have seen a number of crying women,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And heard a number of cheers.</span>
					<span>The ruder yell back</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the sincere citizens cool in their own front yards,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Aw, get a gun and fight for your home yourself!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They grin and fall silent. Nevertheless they go on.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Jake Diefer, the barrel-chested Pennsylvanian,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The steer-thewed, fist-plank-splitter from Cumberland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came through the heat and the dust and the mounting roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That could not drown the rustle of the tall wheat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Making its growing sound, its windrustled sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his heart that sound, that brief and abiding sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>To a fork and a road he knew.</span>
					<span>And then he heard</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That mixed, indocile noise of combat indeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as if it were strange to him when it was not strange.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—He never took much account of the roads they went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were always going somewhere and roads were roads.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But he knew this road.</span>
					<span>He knew its turns and its hills,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what ploughlands lay beyond it, beyond the town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>On the way to Chambersburg.</span>
					<span>He saw with wild eyes</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not the road before him or anything real at all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But grey men in an unreal wheatfield, tramping it down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filling their tattered hats with the ripe, rough grain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>While a shell burst over a barn.</span>
					<span>“Grasshoppers!” he said</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through stiff dry lips to himself as he tried to gauge</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>That mounting roar and its distance.</span>
					<span>“The Johnnies is there!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Johnnies and us is fighting in Gettysburg,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There must be Johnnies back by the farm already,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Jesus, those damn Johnnies is on my farm!”</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>That battle of the first day was a minor battle</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>As such are counted.</span>
					<span>That is, it killed many men.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Killed more than died at Bull Run, left thousands stricken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wounds that time might heal for a little while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or never heal till the breath was out of the flesh.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The First Corps lost half its number in killed and wounded.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pale-faced women, huddled behind drawn blinds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back in the town, or in apple-cellars, hiding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Thought it the end of the world, no doubt.</span>
					<span>And yet</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the books remark, it was only a minor battle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There were only two corps engaged on the Union side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Longstreet had not yet come up, nor Ewell’s whole force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hill’s corps lacked a division till evening fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>It was only a minor battle.</span>
					<span>When the first shot</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clanged out, it was fired from a clump of Union vedettes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Holding a farm in the woods beyond the town.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The farmer was there to hear it⁠—and then to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The troopers scramble back on their restless horses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And go off, firing, as a gray mass came on.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He must have been a peaceable man, that farmer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is said that he died of what he had heard and seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that one brief moment, although no bullet came near him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the storm passed by and did not burst on his farm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No doubt he was easily frightened. He should have reflected</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That even minor battles are hardly the place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For peaceable men⁠—but he died instead, it is said.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There were other deaths that day, as of Smiths and Clancys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Otises, Boyds, Virginia and Pennsylvania,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New York, Carolina, Wisconsin, the gathered West,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tattered Southern marchers dead on the wheat-shocks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Among these deaths a few famous.</span>
					<span>Reynolds is dead,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The model soldier, gallant and courteous,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shot from his saddle in the first of the fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was Doubleday’s friend, but Doubleday has no time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To grieve him, the Union right being driven in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Heth’s Confederates pressing on toward the town.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He holds the onrush back till Howard comes up</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And takes command for a while.</span>
					<span>The fighting is grim.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meade has heard the news. He sends Hancock up to the field.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hancock takes command in mid-combat. The grey comes on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Five color-bearers are killed at one Union color,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last man, dying, still holds up the sagging flag.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pale-faced women creeping out of their houses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plead with retreating bluecoats, “Don’t leave us boys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stay with us⁠—hold the town.” Their faces are thin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their words come tumbling out of a frightened mouth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a field, far off, a peaceable farmer puts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hands to his ears, still hearing that one sharp shot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he will hear and hear till he dies of it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is Hill and Ewell now against Hancock and Howard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a confused, wild clamor⁠—and the high keen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Rebel yell⁠—and the shrill-edged bullet song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beating down men and grain, while the sweaty fighters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grunt as they ram their charges with blackened hands.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Till Hancock and Howard are beaten away at last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outnumbered and outflanked, clean out of the town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Retreating as best they can to a fish-hook ridge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the clamor dies and the sun is going down</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And the tired men think about food.</span>
					<span>The dust-bitten staff</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ewell, riding along through the captured streets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear the thud of a bullet striking their general.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flesh or bone? Death-wound or rub of the game?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The general’s hurt!” They gasp and volley their questions.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ewell turns his head like a bird, “No, I’m not hurt, sir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, supposing the ball had struck you, General Gordon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’d have the trouble of carrying you from the field.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You can see how much better fixed for a fight I am.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It don’t hurt a mite to be shot in your wooden leg.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So it ends. Lee comes on the field in time to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The village taken, the Union wave in retreat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meade will not reach the ground till one the next morning.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>So it ends, this lesser battle of the first day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Starkly disputed and piecemeal won and lost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By corps-commanders who carried no magic plans</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stowed in their sleeves, but fought and held as they could.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is past. The board is staked for the greater game</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which is to follow⁠—The beaten Union brigades</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Recoil from the cross-roads town that they tried to hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so recoiling, rest on a destined ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Who chose that ground?</span>
					<span>There are claimants enough in the books.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Howard thanked by Congress for choosing it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As doubtless, they would have thanked him as well had he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chosen another, once the battle was won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there are a dozen ifs on the Southern side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How, in that first day’s evening, if one had known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If Lee had been there in time, if Jackson had lived,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heights that cost so much blood in the vain attempt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take days later, could have been taken then.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the ifs and the thanks and the rest are all true enough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we can only say, when we look at the board,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“There it happened. There is the way of the land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was the fate, and there the blind swords were crossed.”</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span class="i3">You took a carriage to that battlefield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Now, I suppose, you take a motor-bus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">But then, it was a carriage⁠—and you ate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Fried chicken out of wrappings of waxed paper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">While the slow guide buzzed on about the war</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And the enormous, curdled summer clouds</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Piled up like giant cream puffs in the blue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">The carriage smelt of axle-grease and leather</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And the old horse nodded a sleepy head</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Adorned with a straw hat. His ears stuck through it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">It was the middle of hay-fever summer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And it was hot. And you could stand and look</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">All the way down from Cemetery Ridge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Much as it was, except for monuments</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And startling groups of monumental men</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Bursting in bronze and marble from the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And all the curious names upon the gravestones.⁠ ⁠…</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i3">So peaceable it was, so calm and hot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2 i3">
					<span>So tidy and great-skied.</span>
					<span>No men had fought</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">There but enormous, monumental men</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Who bled neat streams of uncorrupting bronze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Even at the Round Tops, even by Pickett’s boulder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Where the bronze, open book could still be read</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">By visitors and sparrows and the wind:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And the wind came, the wind moved in the grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Saying⁠ ⁠… while the long light⁠ ⁠… and all so calm⁠ ⁠…</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i7">“Pickett came</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">And the South came</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">And the end came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">And the grass comes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">And the wind blows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">On the bronze book</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">On the bronze men</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">On the grown grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">And the wind says</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">‘Long ago</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">Long</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">Ago.’ ”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i3">Then it was time to buy a paperweight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">With flags upon it in decalcomania</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And hope you wouldn’t break it, driving home.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Draw a clumsy fish-hook now on a piece of paper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the left of the shank, by the bend of the curving hook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draw a Maltese cross with the top block cut away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cross is the town. Nine roads star out from it</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>East, West, South, North.</span>
					<span>And now, still more to the left</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the lopped-off cross, on the other side of the town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draw a long, slightly-wavy line of ridges and hills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roughly parallel to the fish-hook shank.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(The hook of the fish-hook is turned away from the cross</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And the wavy line.)</span>
					<span>There your ground and your ridges lie.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fish-hook is Cemetery Ridge and the North</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting to be assaulted⁠—the wavy line</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seminary Ridge whence the Southern assault will come.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The valley between is more than a mile in breadth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is some three miles from the lowest jut of the cross</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the button at the far end of the fish-hook shank,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Big Round Top, with Little Round Top not far away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both ridges are strong and rocky, well made for war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the Northern one is the stronger shorter one.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lee’s army must spread out like an uncoiled snake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lying along a fence-rail, while Meade’s can coil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or half-way coil, like a snake part clung to a stone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meade has the more men and the easier shifts to make,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lee the old prestige of triumph and his tried skill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His task is⁠—to coil his snake round the other snake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Halfway clung to the stone, and shatter it so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or to break some point in the shank of the fish-hook line</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And so cut the snake in two.</span>
					<span>Meade’s task is to hold.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That is the chess and the scheme of the wooden blocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Set down on the contour map.</span>
					<span>Having learned so much,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forget it now, while the ripple-lines of the map</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arise into bouldered ridges, tree-grown, bird-visited,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the gnats buzz, and the wren builds a hollow nest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the rocks are grey in the sun and black in the rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the jacks-in-the-pulpit grow in the cool, damp hollows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See no names of leaders painted upon the blocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Such as “Hill,” or “Hancock,” or “Pender”⁠—</span>
					<span>but see instead</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three miles of living men⁠—three long double miles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of men and guns and horses and fires and wagons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Teamsters, surgeons, generals, orderlies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hundred and sixty thousand living men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Asleep or eating or thinking or writing brief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Notes in the thought of death, shooting dice or swearing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Groaning in hospital wagons, standing guard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the slow stars walk through heaven in silver mail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hearing a stream or a joke or a horse cropping grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or hearing nothing, being too tired to hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All night till the round sun comes and the morning breaks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three double miles of live men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listen to them, their breath goes up through the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a great chord of life, in the sighing murmur</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Of wind-stirred wheat.</span>
					<span>A hundred and sixty thousand</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breathing men, at night, on two hostile ridges set down.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Jack Ellyat slept that night on the rocky ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Cemetery Hill while the cold stars marched,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if his bed was harder than Jacob’s stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet he could sleep on it now and be glad for sleep.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He had been through Chancellorsville and the whistling wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had been through this last day. It is well to sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>After such days.</span>
					<span>He had seen, in the last four months,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many roads, much weather and death, and two men fey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before they died with the prescience of death to come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>John Haberdeen and the corporal from Millerstown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such things are often remembered even in sleep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thought to himself, before he lay on the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“We got it hot today in that red-brick town</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But we’ll get it hotter tomorrow.”</span>
					<span>And when he woke</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saw the round sun risen in the clear sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He could feel that thought steam up from the rocky ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And touch each man.</span>
					<span>One man looked down from the hill,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That must be their whole damn army,” he said and whistled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“It’ll be a picnic today, boys. Yes, it’ll be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A regular basket-picnic.” He whistled again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Shut your trap about picnics, Ace,” said another man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“You make me too damn hungry!”</span>
					<span>He sighed out loud.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“We had enough of a picnic at Chancellorsville,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said. “I ain’t felt right in my stummick since.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Can you make ’em out?”</span>
					<span>“Sure,” said Ace, “but they’re pretty far.”</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Wonder who we’ll get? That bunch we got yesterday</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Was a mean-shootin’ bunch.”</span>
					<span>“Now don’t you worry,” said Ace,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“We’ll get plenty.”</span>
					<span>The other man sighed again.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Did you see that darky woman selling hot pies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two days ago, on the road?” he said, licking his lips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Blackberry pies. The boys ahead got a lot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Jake and me clubbed together for three. And then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just as we were ready to make the sneak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who comes up with a roar but the provost-guard?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did we get any pies? I guess you know if we did.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I couldn’t spit for an hour, I felt so mad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Next war I’m goin’ to be provost-guard or bust.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A thin voice said abruptly, “They’re moving⁠—lookit⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>They’re moving, I tell you⁠—lookit⁠—”</span>
					<span>They all looked then.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little crackling noise as of burning thornsticks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began far away⁠—ceased wholly⁠—began again⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“We won’t get it awhile,” thought Ellyat. “They’re trying the left.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We won’t get it awhile, but we’ll get it soon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I feel funny today. I don’t think I’m going to be killed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I feel funny. That’s their whole army all right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wonder if those other two felt like this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>John Haberdeen and the corporal from Millerstown?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What’s it like to see your name on a bullet?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It must feel queer. This is going to be a big one.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Johnnies know it. That house looks pretty down there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>Phaëton, charioteer in your drunken car,</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>What have you got for a man that carries my name?</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’re a damn good company now, if we say it ourselves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Old Man knows it⁠—but this one’s bound to be tough.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wonder what they’re feeling like over there.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<em>Charioteer, you were driving yesterday,</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>No doubt, but I did not see you. I see you now.</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span><em>What have you got today for a man with my name?</em>”</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>The firing began that morning at nine o’clock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it was three before the attacks were launched.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There were two attacks, one a drive on the Union left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take the Round Tops, the other one on the right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lee had planned them to strike together and, striking so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Cut the Union snake in three pieces.</span>
					<span>It did not happen.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the left, Dutch Longstreet, slow, pugnacious and stubborn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard to beat and just as hard to convince,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has his own ideas of the battle and does not move</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For hours after the hour that Lee had planned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though, when he does, he moves with pugnacious strength.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Facing him, in the valley before the Round Tops,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sickles thrusts out blue troops in a weak right angle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some distance from the Ridge, by the Emmettsburg pike.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is a peach orchard there, a field of ripe wheat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And other peaceable things soon not to be peaceful.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They say the bluecoats, marching through the ripe wheat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made a blue-and-yellow picture that men remember</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even now in their age, in their crack-voiced age.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They say the noise was incessant as the sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all wolves howling, when that attack came on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They say, when the guns all spoke, that the solid ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the rocky ridges trembled like a sick child.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>We have made the sick earth tremble with other shakings</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<em>In our time, in our time, in our time, but it has not taught us</em>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>
						<em>To leave the grain in the field.</em>
					</span>
					<span>So the storm came on</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Yelling against the angle.</span>
					<span>The men who fought there</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were the tried fighters, the hammered, the weather-beaten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The very hard-dying men.</span>
					<span>They came and died</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And came again and died and stood there and died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till at last the angle was crumpled and broken in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sickles shot down, Willard, Barlow and Semmes shot down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wheatfield and orchard bloody and trampled and taken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hood’s tall Texans sweeping on toward the Round Tops</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>As Hood fell wounded.</span>
					<span>On Little Round Top’s height</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stands a lonely figure, seeing that rush come on⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greek-mouthed Warren, Meade’s chief of engineers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—Sometimes, and in battle even, a moment comes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When a man with eyes can see a dip in the scales</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, so seeing, reverse a fortune. Warren has eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And such a moment comes to him now. He turns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—In a clear flash seeing the crests of the Round Tops taken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grey artillery there and the battle lost⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rides off hell-for-leather to gather troops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bring them up in the very nick of time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the grey rush still advances, keening its cry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crest is three times taken and then retaken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In fierce wolf-flurries of combat, in gasping Iliads</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too rapid to note or remember, too obscure to freeze in a song.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But at last, when the round sun drops, when the nun-footed night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dark-veiled walker, holding the first weak stars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like children against her breast, spreads her pure cloths there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Union still holds the Round Tops and the two hard keys of war.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Night falls. The blood drips in the rocks of the Devil’s Den.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The murmur begins to rise from the thirsty ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the twenty thousand dead and wounded lie.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Such was Longstreet’s war, and such the Union defence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deaths and the woundings, the victory and defeat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>At the end of the fish-hook shank.</span>
					<span>And so Longstreet failed</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere Ewell and Early struck the fish-hook itself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Culp’s Hill and the Ridge and at Cemetery Hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With better fortune, though not with fortune enough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To plant hard triumph deep on the sharp-edged rocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And break the scales of the snake.</span>
					<span>When that last attack</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came, with its cry, Jack Ellyat saw it come on.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>They had been waiting for hours on that hard hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes under fire, sometimes untroubled by shells.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man chewed a stick of grass and hummed to himself.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another played mumbledeypeg with a worn black knife.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two men were talking girls till they got too mad</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And the sergeant stopped them.</span>
					<span>Then they waited again.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Jack Ellyat waited, hearing that other roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rise and fall, be distant and then approach.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now and then he turned on his side and looked at the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if to build a house of peace from that blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But could find no house of peace there.</span>
					<span>Only the roar,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slow sun sinking, the fey touch at his mind.⁠ ⁠…</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He was lying behind a tree and a chunk of rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On thick, coarse grass. Farther down the slope of the hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There were houses, a rough stone wall, and blue loungy men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind them lay the batteries on the crest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He wondered if there were people still in the houses.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One house had a long, slant roof. He followed the slant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the roof with his finger, idly, pleased with the line.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The shelling burst out from the Southern guns again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their own batteries answered behind them. He looked at his house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the shells came down. I’d like to live in that house.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Now the shelling lessened.</span>
					<span>The man with the old black knife</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shut up the knife and began to baby his rifle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>They’re coming, Jack thought. This is it.</span>
					<span>There was an abrupt</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slight stiffening in the bodies of other men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A few chopped ends of words scattered back and forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eyes looking, hands busy in swift, well-accustomed gestures.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is it. He felt his own hands moving like theirs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though he was not telling them to. This is it. He felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old familiar tightness around his chest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The man with the grass chewed his stalk a little too hard</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And then suddenly spat it out.</span>
					<span>Jack Ellyat saw</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the falling night, that slight, grey fringe that was war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coming against them, not as it came in pictures</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a ruler-edge, but a crinkled and smudgy line</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a child’s vague scrawl in soft crayon, but moving on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with its little red handkerchiefs of flags</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Sagging up and down, here and there.</span>
					<span>It was still quite far,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was still like a toy attack⁠—it was swallowed now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a wood and came out larger with larger flags.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their own guns on the crest were trying to break it up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—Smoking sand thrown into an ant-legged line⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it still kept on⁠—one fringe and another fringe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And another and⁠—</span>
					<span>He lost them all for a moment</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>In a dip of ground.</span>
					<span>This is it, he thought with a parched</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mind. It’s a big one. They must be yelling all right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though you can’t hear them. They’re going to do it this time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do it or bust⁠—you can tell from the way they come⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I hope to Christ that the batteries do their job</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>When they get out of that dip.</span>
					<span>Hell, they’ve lost ’em now,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And they’re still coming.</span>
					<span>He heard a thin gnat-shrieking</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“Hold your fire till they’re close enough, men!”</span>
					<span>The new lieutenant.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The new lieutenant looked thin. “Aw, go home,” he muttered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“We’re no militia⁠—What do you think we are?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then suddenly, down by his house, the low stone wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flashed and was instantly huge with a wall of smoke.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was yelling now. He saw a red battleflag</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Push through smoke like a prow and be blotted out</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>By smoke and flash.</span>
					<span>His heart knocked hard in his chest.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Do it or bust,” he mumbled, holding his fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>While the rags of smoke blew off.</span>
					<span>He heard a thick chunk</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside him, turned his head for a flicker of time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The man who had chewed on the grass was injuredly trying</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rise on his knees, his face annoyed by a smile.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the blood poured over the smile and he crumpled up.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ellyat stretched out a hand to touch him and felt the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Rasped by a file.</span>
					<span>He jerked back the hand and sucked it.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Bastards,” he said in a minor and even voice.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All this had occurred, it seemed, in no time at all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when he turned back, the smoky slope of the hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was grey⁠—and a staggering red advancing flag</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And those same shouting strangers he knew so well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No longer ants⁠—but there⁠—and stumblingly running⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that high, shrill, hated keen piercing all the flat thunder.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His lips went back. He felt something swell in his chest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Like a huge, indocile bubble.</span>
					<span>“By God,” he said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loading and firing, “You’re not going to get this hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’re not going to get this hill. By God, but you’re not!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He saw one grey man spin like a crazy dancer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And another fall at his heels⁠—but the hill kept growing them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Something made him look toward his left.</span>
					<span>A yellow-fanged face</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was aiming a pistol over a chunk of rock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fired and the face went down like a broken pipe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While something hit him sharply and took his breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Get back, you suckers,” he croaked, “Get back there, you suckers!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wouldn’t have time to load now⁠—they were too near.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was up and screaming. He swung his gun like a club</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through a twilight full of bright stabbings, and felt it crash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a thing that broke. He had no breath any more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had no thoughts. Then the blunt fist hit him again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He was down in the grass and the black sheep of night ran over him⁠ ⁠…</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>That day, Melora Vilas sat by the spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her child in her arms and felt the warm wind blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ruffling the little pool that had shown two faces</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apart and then clung together for a brief while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if the mouths had been silver and so fused there.⁠ ⁠…</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The wind blew at the child’s shut fists but it could not open them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The child slept well. The child was a strong, young child.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Wind, you have blown the green leaf and the brown leaf</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in and out of my restless heart you blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Wakening me again.</span>
					<span>I had thought for a while</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart was a child and could sleep like any child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now that the wind is warm, I remember my lover,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must you blow all summer, warm wind?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Divide anew this once-divided flesh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into twelve shares of mercy and on each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bestow a fair and succourable child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, in full summer, when the ripened stalks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bow in the wind like golden-headed men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the sun, the shares will reunite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into unmerciful and childless love.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She thought again, “No, it’s not that, it’s not that,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I love my child with an ‘L’ because he’s little,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I love my child with an ‘S’ because he’s strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>With an ‘M’ because he’s mine.</span>
					<span>But I’m restless now.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We cut the heart on the tree but the bark’s grown back there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ve got my half of the dime but I want his.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The winter-sleep is over.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The shadows were longer now. The child waked and cried.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She rocked and hushed it, feeling the warm wind blow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I’ve got to find him,” she said.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>About that time, the men rode up to the house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the other way. Their horses were rough and wild.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There were a dozen of them and they came fast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bent should have been out in the woods but he had come down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mend a split wagon-wheel. He was caught in the barn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They couldn’t warn him in time, though John Vilas tried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they held John Vilas and started to search the place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the younger children scuttled around like mice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Squeaking “It’s drafters, Mom⁠—it’s the drafters again!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even then, if Bent had hidden under the hay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They might not have found him, being much pressed for time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But perhaps he was tired of hiding.</span>
					<span>At any rate</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Melora reached the edge of the little clearing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She saw them there and Bent there, up on a horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her mother rigid as wood and her father dumb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the head man saying, gently enough on the whole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Don’t you worry, m’am⁠—he’ll make a good soldier yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>If he acts proper.”</span>
					<span>That was how they got Bent.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>On the crest of the hill, the sweaty cannoneers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blackened Pennsylvanians, picked up their rammers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fought the charge with handspikes and clubs and stones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Biting and howling. It is said that they cried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wildly, “Death on the soil of our native state</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rather than lose our guns.” A general says so.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was not there. I do not know what they cried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that they fought, there was witness⁠—and that the grey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wave that came on them fought, there was witness too.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For an instant that wheel of combat⁠—and for an instant</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>A brief, hard-breathing hush.</span>
					<span>Then came the hard sound</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a column tramping⁠—blue reinforcements at last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>A doomsday sound to the grey.</span>
					<span>The hard column came</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the battered crest and went in with a yell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grey charge bent and gave ground, the grey charge was broken.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sweaty gunners fell to their guns again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And began to scatter the shells in the ebbing wave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus ended the second day of the locked bull-horns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the wounding or slaying of the twenty thousand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And thus night came to cover it.</span>
					<span>So the field</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was alive all night with whispers and words and sighs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the slow blood dripped in the rocks of the Devil’s Den.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lincoln, back in his White House, asks for news.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The War Department has little. There are reports</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heavy firing near Gettysburg⁠—that is all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Davis, in Richmond, knows as little as he.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In hollow Vicksburg, the shells come down and come down</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And the end is but two days off.</span>
					<span>On the field itself</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meade calls a council and considers retreat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His left has held and the Round Tops still are his.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But his right has been shaken, his centre pierced for a time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The enemy holds part of his works on Culp’s Hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>His losses have been most stark.</span>
					<span>He thinks of these things</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And decides at last to fight it out where he stands.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Ellyat lay upon Cemetery Hill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>His wounds had begun to burn.</span>
					<span>He was rising up</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through cold and vacant darknesses into faint light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The yellow, watery light of a misty moon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He stirred a little and groaned.</span>
					<span>There was something cool</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his face and hands. It was dew. He lay on his back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stared at a blowing cloud and a moist, dark sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“Old charioteer,” he thought.</span>
					<span>He remembered dully</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The charge. The charge had come. They had beaten the charge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now it was moist dark sky and the dew and his pain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He tried to get his canteen but he couldn’t reach it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>That made him afraid.</span>
					<span>“I want some water,” he said.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He turned his head through stiff ages.</span>
					<span>Two feet away</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man was lying quietly, fast asleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bearded man in an enemy uniform.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had a canteen. Ellyat wet his lips with his tongue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hey Johnnie, got some water?” he whispered weakly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then he saw that the Johnnie had only half a head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And frowned because such men could not lend canteens.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He was half-delirious now, and it seemed to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if he had two bodies, one that was pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one that lay beyond pain, on a couch of dew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stared at the other with sober wondering eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Everyone’s dead around here but me,” he thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And as long as I don’t sing out, they’ll think that I’m dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And those stretcher-bearers won’t find me⁠—there goes their lantern</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, it’s the moon⁠—Sing out and tell ’em you’re here.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hot body cried and groaned. The cool watched it idly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The yellow moon burst open like a ripe fruit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from it rolled on a dark, streaked shelf of sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A car and horses, bearing the brazen ball</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the unbearable sun, that halted above him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In full rush forward, yet frozen, a motion congealed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Heavy with light.</span>
					<span>Toy death above Gettysburg.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He saw it so and cried out in a weak, thin voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While something jagged fitted into his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And the cool body watched idly.</span>
					<span>And then it was</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lantern, bobbing along through the clumped dead men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That halted now for an instant. He cried again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A voice said, “Listen, Jerry, you’re hearing things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ve passed that feller twice and he’s dead all right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>I’ll bet you money.”</span>
					<span>Ellyat heard himself piping,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I’m alive, God damn you! Can’t you hear I’m alive?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Something laughed, quite close now.</span>
					<span>“All right, Bub,” said a cloud,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“We’ll take your word for it. My, but the boy’s got language!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go ahead and cuss while we get you up on the stretcher⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>It helps some⁠—easy there, Joe.”</span>
					<span>Jack Ellyat fell</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of his bodies into a whispering blackness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through which, now and then, he could hear certain talking clouds</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Cough or remark.</span>
					<span>One said. “That’s two and a half</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You owe me, Joe. You’re pickin’ ’em wrong tonight.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Well, poor suckers,” said Joseph. “But all the same,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If this one doesn’t last till the dressing station</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bet’s off⁠—take it slower, Jerry⁠—it hurts him.”</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Another clear dawn breaks over Gettysburg,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Promising heat and fair weather⁠—and with the dawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The guns are crashing again.</span>
					<span>It is the third day.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The morning wears with a stubborn fight at Culp’s Hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ends at last in Confederate repulse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that barb-end of the fish-hook cleared of the grey.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lee has tried his strokes on the right and left of the line.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The centre remains⁠—that centre yesterday pierced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a brief, wild moment in Wilcox’s attack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But since then trenched, reinforced and alive with guns.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is a chance. All war is a chance like that.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lee considers the chance and the force he has left to spend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And states his will.</span>
					<span>Dutch Longstreet, the independent,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Demurs, as he has demurred since the fight began.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had disapproved of this battle from the first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that disapproval has added and is to add</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another weight in the balance against the grey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is not our task to try him for sense or folly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such men are the men they are⁠—but an hour comes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes, to fix such men in most fateful parts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As now with Longstreet who, if he had his orders</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As they were given, neither obeyed them quite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor quite refused them, but acted as he thought best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So did the half-thing, failed as he thought he would,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Felt justified and wrote all of his reasons down</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Later in controversy.</span>
					<span>We do not need</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such controversies to see that pugnacious man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Talking to Lee, a stubborn line in his brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And that unseen fate between them.</span>
					<span>Lee hears him out</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Unmoved, unchanging.</span>
					<span>“The enemy is there</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I am going to strike him,” says Lee, inflexibly.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span class="i3">Wingate cursed with an equal stress</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">The guns in the sky and his weariness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">The nightmare riding of yesterday</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">When they slept in the saddle by whole platoons</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And the Pennsylvania farmer’s grey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">With hocks as puffy as toy balloons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">A graceless horse, without gaits or speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">But all he had for his time of need.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">“I’d as soon be riding a Jersey cow.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">But the Black Horse Troop was piebald now</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And the Black Horse Troop was worn to the blade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">With the dull fatigue of this last, long raid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Huger Shepley rode in a tense</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Gloom of the spirit that found offence</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">In all things under the summer skies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And the recklessness in Bristol’s eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Had lost its color of merriment.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Horses and men, they were well-nigh spent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Wingate grinned as he heard the “Mount,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">“Reckon we look sort of no-account,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">But we’re here at last for somebody’s fight.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">They rode toward the curve of the Union right.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>At one o’clock the first signal-gun was fired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the solid ground began to be sick anew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For two hours then that sickness, the unhushed roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of two hundred and fifty cannon firing like one.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>By Philadelphia, eighty-odd miles away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An old man stooped and put his ear to the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heard that roar, it is said, like the vague sea-clash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a hollow conch-shell, there, in his flowerbeds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had planted trumpet-flowers for fifteen years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now the flowers were blowing an iron noise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through earth itself. He wiped his face on his sleeve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tottered back to his house with fear in his eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The caissons began to blow up in the Union batteries.⁠ ⁠…</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>The cannonade fell still. All along the fish-hook line,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tired men stared at the smoke and waited for it to clear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men in the centre waited, their rifles gripped in their hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the trees of the riding fate, and the low stone wall, and the guns.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>These were Hancock’s men, the men of the Second Corps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eleven States were mixed there, where Minnesota stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In battle-order with Maine, and Rhode Island beside New York,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The metals of all the North, cooled into an axe of war.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The strong sticks of the North, bound into a fasces-shape,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hard winters of snow, the wind with the cutting edge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And against them came that summer that does not die with the year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Magnolia and honeysuckle and the blue Virginia flag.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Tall Pickett went up to Longstreet⁠—his handsome face was drawn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>George Pickett, old friend of Lincoln’s in days gone by with the blast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he was a courteous youth and Lincoln the strange shawled man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who would talk in a Springfield street with a boy who dreamt of a sword.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dreamt of a martial sword, as swords are martial in dreams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the courtesy to use it, in the old bright way of the tales.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those days are gone with the blast. He has his sword in his hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he will use it today, and remember that using long.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He came to Longstreet for orders, but Longstreet would not speak.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw Old Peter’s mouth and the thought in Old Peter’s mind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knew the task that was set and the men that he had to lead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a pride came into his face while Longstreet stood there dumb.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I shall go forward, sir,” he said and turned to his men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The commands went down the line. The grey ranks started to move.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slowly at first, then faster, in order, stepping like deer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Virginians, the fifteen thousand, the seventh wave of the tide.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There was a death-torn mile of broken ground to cross,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a low stone wall at the end, and behind it the Second Corps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And behind that force another, fresh men who had not yet fought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They started to cross that ground. The guns began to tear them.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From the hill they say that it seemed more like a sea than a wave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sea continually torn by stones flung out of the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet, as it came, still closing, closing and rolling on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the moving sea closes over the flaws and rips of the tide.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>You could mark the path that they took by the dead that they left behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spilled from that deadly march as a cart spills meal on a road,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet they came on unceasing, the fifteen thousand no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the blue Virginia flag did not fall, did not fall, did not fall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They halted but once to fire as they came. Then the smoke closed down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you could not see them, and then, as it cleared again for a breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were coming still but divided, gnawed at by blue attacks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One flank half-severed and halted, but the centre still like a tide.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Cushing ran down the last of his guns to the battle-line.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rest had been smashed to scrap by Lee’s artillery fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He held his guts in his hand as the charge came up to the wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his gun spoke out for him once before he fell to the ground.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Armistead leapt the wall and laid his hand on the gun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last of the three brigadiers who ordered Pickett’s brigades,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He waved his hat on his sword and “Give ’em the steel!” he cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A few men followed him over. The rest were beaten or dead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A few men followed him over. There had been fifteen thousand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When that sea began its march toward the fish-hook ridge and the wall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So they came on in strength, light-footed, stepping like deer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So they died or were taken. So the iron entered their flesh.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lee, a mile away, in the shade of a little wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stared, with his mouth shut down, and saw them go and be slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then saw for a single moment, the blue Virginia flag</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Planted beyond the wall, by that other flag that he knew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The two flags planted together, one instant, like hostile flowers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the smoke wrapped both in a mantle⁠—and when it had blown away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Armistead lay in his blood, and the rest were dead or down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the valley grey with the fallen and the wreck of the broken wave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Pickett gazed around him, the boy who had dreamt of a sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And talked with a man named Lincoln. The sword was still in his hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had gone out with fifteen thousand. He came back to his lines with five.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fought well till the war was over, but a thing was cracked in his heart.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Wingate, waiting the sultry sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That would pour the troop over hostile ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Petted his grey like a loving son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wondered whether the brute would run</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When it came to fighting, or merely shy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was a look in the rolling eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he knew too well to criticize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Having seen it sometimes in other eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Poor old Fatty,” he said, “Don’t fret,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s tough, but it hasn’t happened yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we may get through it if you behave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though it looks just now like a right close shave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There’s something funny about this fight⁠—”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thought of Lucy in candlelight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White and gold as the evening star,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Giving bright ribbons to men at war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the face grew dimmer and ever dimmer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gold was there but the gold was fainter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a slow brush streaked it with something grimmer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than the proper tint of a lady’s painter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the shadow she cast was a ruddy shadow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rubbed his eyes and stared at the meadow.⁠ ⁠…</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“There was a girl I used to go with,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Long ago, when the skies were cooler,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was a tree we used to grow with</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marking our heights with a stolen ruler.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There was a cave where we hid and fought once.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There was a pool where the wind kept writing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was a possum-child we caught once.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Caged it awhile, for all its biting.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There was a gap in a fence to see there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Down where the sparrows were always wrangling.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was a girl who used to be there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dark and thin, with her long braids dangling.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dark and thin in her scuffed brown slippers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With a boy’s sling stuck in her apron-pocket,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a sting in her tongue like a gallinipper’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the eyes of a ghost in a silver locket.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>White and gold, white and gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You cannot be cold as she was cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cold of the air and the running stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cold of the ice-tempered dream.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Gold and white, gold and white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You burn with the heat of candlelight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But what if I set you down alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the burning meteor-stone?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Blow North, blow South, blow hot, blow cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My body is pledged to white and gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My honor given to kith and kin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my doom-clothes ready to wrap me in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the shut heart and the open hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As long as Wingate Hall shall stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the fire burn and the water cool</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a fool beget another fool⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But now, in the hour before this fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have forgotten gold and white.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will remember lost delight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She has the Appleton mouth, it seems,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Appleton way of riding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if she quarrels or when she gleams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something comes out from hiding.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She can sew all day on an Appleton hem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And look like a saint in plaster,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when the fiddles begin to play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her feet beat fast but her heart beats faster,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An alien grace is alive in them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she looks like her father, the dancing-master,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The scapegrace elegant, ‘French Dupré.’ ”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the word came and the bugle sang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he was part of the running clang,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rush and the shock and the sabres licking</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the fallen horses screaming and kicking.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His grey was tired and his arm unsteady</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he whirled like a leaf in a shrieking eddy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where every man was fighting his neighbor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there was no room for the tricks of sabre</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But only a wild and nightmare sickling.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His head felt burnt⁠—there was something trickling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into his eyes⁠—then the new charge broke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eddy apart like scattered smoke;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cut on his head half made him blind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If he had a mind, he had lost that mind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He came to himself in a battered place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Staring at Wainscott Bristol’s face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dried blood made it a ferret’s mask.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“What happened?” he croaked.</span>
					<span>“Well, you can ask,”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said Bristol, drawling, “But don’t ask me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For any facts of the jamboree.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I reckon we’ve been to an Irish wake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or maybe cuttin’ a johnny-cake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With most of the Union cavalry-corps.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I don’t know yet, but it was a war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are you crazy still? You were for a piece.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You yelled you were Destiny’s long-lost niece</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wanted to charge the whole Yank line</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because they’d stolen your valentine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You fought like a fool but you talked right wild.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>You got a bad bump, too.”</span>
					<span>Wingate smiled</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I reckon I did, but I don’t know when.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Did we win or what?”</span>
					<span>“And I say again,”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said Bristol, heavily, “don’t ask me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inquire of General Robert Lee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know we’re in for a long night ride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they say we got whipped on the other side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What’s left of the Troop are down by the road.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We lost John Leicester and Harry Spode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Lawley boys and Ballantyne.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Major’s all right⁠—but there’s Jim Devine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Francis Carroll and Judson White⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wish I had some liquor tonight.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wingate touched the cut on his head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It burned, but it no longer bled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I wish I could sleep ten years,” he said.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>The night of the third day falls. The battle is done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lee entrenches that night upon Seminary Ridge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All next day the battered armies still face each other</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Like enchanted beasts.</span>
					<span>Lee thinks he may be attacked,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hopes for it, perhaps, is not, and prepares his retreat.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Vicksburg has fallen, hollow Vicksburg has fallen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cavedwellers creep from their caves and blink at the sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pan of the Southern balance goes down and down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cotton is withering.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Army of Northern Virginia, haggard and tattered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tramping back on the pikes, through the dust-white summer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With your wounds still fresh, your burden of prisoners,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your burden of sick and wounded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“One long groan of human anguish six miles long.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You reach the swollen Potomac at long last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A foe behind, a risen river in front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fording that swollen river, in the dim starlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the yellow and early dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still have heart enough for the tall, long-striding soldiers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mock the short, half swept away by the stream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Better change our name to Lee’s Waders, boys!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Come on you shorty⁠—get a ride on my back.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Aw, it’s just we ain’t had a bath in seven years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And General Lee, he knows we need a good bath.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So you splash and slip through the water and come at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safe, to the Southern side, while Meade does not strike;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safe to take other roads, safe to march upon roads you know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For two long years. And yet⁠—each road that you take,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each dusty road leads to Appomattox now.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
