<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Book VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-8" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>It is over now, but they will not let it be over.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It was over with John Brown when the sun rose up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To show him the town in arms and he did not flee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet men were killed after that, before it was over,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he did not die until November was cool</span>
				<br/>
				<span>--Yellow leaves falling through a blue-grey dusk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The first winds of November whirl and scatter them--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So now, the Confederacy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sick with its mortal sickness, yet lives on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For twenty-one falling months of pride and despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half-hopes blown out in the lighting, heroic strokes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That come to nothing, and death piled hard upon death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Follow that agony if you must and can</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the brushwood names, by the bloody prints in the woods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cold Harbor and Spottsylvania and Yellow Tavern</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the lost court-houses and country stores</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the Wilderness, where the bitter fighting passed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(No fighting bitterer)--follow the rabbit-runs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the tangled wilds where the hair of the wounded men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caught fire from the burning trees, where they lay in the swamps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like half-charred logs--find the place they called "Hell's Half Acre."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Follow the Indian names in the Indian West,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chickamauga and Chattanooga and all the words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That are sewn on flags or cut in an armory wall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My cyclorama is not the shape of the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor even the shape of this war from first to last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But like a totem carved, like a totem stained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With certain beasts and skies and faces of men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That would not let me be too quiet at night</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Till they were figured.</span>
					<span>Therefore now, through the storm,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The war, the rumor, the grinding of the machine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let certain sounds, let certain voices be heard.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A Richmond lady sits in a Richmond square</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside a working-girl. They talk of the war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They talk of the food and the prices in low-pitched voices</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With hunger fretting them both. Then they go their ways.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, before she departs, the lady has asked a question--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The working-girl pulls up the sleeve of her dress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shows the lady the sorry bone of her arm.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Grant has come East to take up his last command</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And the grand command of the armies.</span>
					<span>It is five years</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since he sat, with a glass, by the stove in a country store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stumpy, mute man in a faded Army overcoat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eldest-born of the Grants but the family-failure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, for a week, he shines in the full array</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gold cord and black-feathered hat and superb blue coat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he talks with the trim, well-tailored Eastern men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is his only moment of such parade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the fighting starts, he is chewing a dead cigar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With only the battered stars to show the rank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the shoulderstraps of the private's uniform.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It is sullen Cold Harbor. The Union attack has failed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repulsed with a ghastly slaughter. The twilight falls.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The word goes round the attack will be made again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though all know now that it cannot be made and win.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An anxious officer walks through his lines that night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There has been no mutiny yet, throughout all these years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he wonders now. What are the men doing now?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sees them there. They are silently writing their names</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On bits of rag and sewing the scraps of cloth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To their jackets while they can, before the attack.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When they die, next morning, somebody may read the names.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Pickett's son is born on a night of mid-July</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the two armies face each other, and Pickett's men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light bonfires of celebration along his lines.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fire is seen from the tents of the other camp.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The news goes back to Grant and his chief of staff.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Haven't we any wood for the little Pickett?" says Grant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Union bonfires are lighted for Pickett's son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>--All night those two lines of brush-fire, facing each other--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Next day they send the baby a silver service.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Next week or so they move upon Pickett's works.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On a muddy river, little toy boats go out.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soldiers are swapping coffee for rank tobacco,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Northern badge for a Southern souvenir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A piece of white-flour bread for a hunk of corn-pone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Northern lieutenant swims the river at night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To go to a Southern dance at a backwoods store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joke with the girls, swim back, and fight the next day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>With his hosts of the night before.</span>
					<span>On disputed ground,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A grey-clad private worms his way like a snake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Union sentries see him and start to fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Aw, shut up, Yank," he calls in a weary voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"I just skun out to salvage the chaplain's hat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It's the only one he's got and it just blew off."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The firing stops.</span>
					<span>"All right, Johnny," the sentries call,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Get your hat, but be quick about it. We won't hurt you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But you better be back by the time our relief gets here."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A Southern sharpshooter crouched in a blue-gum tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drills a tiny blue-coated figure between the eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a pea-ball fired from a smooth-bore squirrel-rifle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dead man's brother waits three days for his shot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the sharpshooter crashes down through the breaking boughs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a lumpy bird, spread-eagled out of his nest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The desolate siege of Petersburg begins.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grain goes first, then the cats and the squeaking mice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thin cats stagger starving about the streets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Die or are eaten. There are no more cats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Petersburg--and in Charleston the creeping grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grows over the wharves where the ships of the world came in.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grass and the moss grow over the stones of the wharves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Georgia belle eats sherbet near Andersonville</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the Union prisoners rot. Another is weeping</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The death of her brother, killed in a Union raid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the North, the factory chimneys smoke and fume;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The minstrels have raised their prices, but every night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bones and Tambo play to a crowded house.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hotels are full. The German Opera is here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ladies at Newport drive in their four-in-hands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old woman sells her papers about the war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The country widows stitch on a rusty black.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In the Shenandoah Valley, the millwheels rot.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Sheridan has been there.) Where the houses stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strong houses, built for weather, lasting it out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chimneys stand alone. The chimneys are blackened.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Sheridan has been there.) This Valley has been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The granary of Lee's army for years and years.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sheridan makes his report on his finished work.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"If a crow intends to fly over the Valley now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He'll have to carry his own provisions," says Sheridan.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The lonely man with the chin like John Calhoun's</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knows it is over, will not know it is over.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many hands are turning against him in these last years.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He makes mistakes. He is stubborn and sick at heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He is inflexible with fate and men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is over. It cannot be. He fights to the end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clinging to one last dream--of somehow, somewhere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A last, miraculous battle where he can lead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One wing of the Southern army and Lee the other</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so wrench victory out of the failing odds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why is it a dream? He has studied grand strategy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was thought a competent soldier in Mexico,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He was Secretary of War once--</span>
					<span>He is the rigid</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scholar we know and have seen in another place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lacking that scholar's largeness, but with the same</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tight mouth, the same intentness on one concept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The same ideal that must bend all life to its will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or break to pieces--and that is the best of him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pettiness is the pettiness of a girl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More than a man's--a brilliant and shrewish girl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never too well in body yet living long.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He has that unforgiveness of women in him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And women will always know him better than men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except for a few, in spite of Mexican wars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In spite of this last, most desolate, warlike dream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give him the tasks that other scholar assumed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He would not have borne them as greatly or with such skill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And yet--one can find a likeness.</span>
					<span>So now he dreams</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hopelessly of a fight he will never fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if worst comes to worst, perhaps, of a last</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Plutarch-death on a shield.</span>
					<span>It is not to be.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He will snatch up a cloak of his wife's by accident</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the moment before his capture, and so be seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The proud man turned into farce, into sorry farce</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Before the ignorant gapers.</span>
					<span>He shades his eyes</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rest them a moment, turns to his work again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The gaunt man, Abraham Lincoln, lives his days.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a while the sky above him is very dark.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are fifty thousand dead in these last, bleak months</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And Richmond is still untaken.</span>
					<span>The papers rail,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grant is a butcher, the war will never be done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gaunt man's term of office draws to an end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His best friends muse and are doubtful. He thinks himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a while that when the time of election comes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He will not be re-elected. He does not flinch.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He draws up a paper and seals it with his own hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>His cabinet signs it, unread.</span>
					<span>Such writing might be</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A long historic excuse for defeated strength.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is very short and strict with its commonsense.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"It seems we may not rule this nation again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If so, we must do our best, while we still have time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To plan with the new rulers who are to come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How best to save the Union before they come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For they will have been elected upon such grounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they cannot possibly save it, once in our place."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The cloud lifts, after all. They bring him the news.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He is sure of being President four years more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thinks about it. He says, "Well, I guess they thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They'd better not swap horses, crossing a stream."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deserters begin to leave the Confederate armies. . . .</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Luke Breckinridge woke up one sunshiny morning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone, in a roadside ditch, to be hungry again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though he was used to being hungry by now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He looked at his rifle and thought, "Well, I ought to clean it."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He looked at his feet and he thought, "Well, I ought to get</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another bunch of rags if we-uns is goin'</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To march much more--these rags is down to my hide."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He looked at his ribs through the tears in his dirty shirt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he thought, "Well, I sure am thin as a razorback.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well, that's the way it is. Well, I ought to do somethin'.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I ought to catch up with the boys. I wish I remembered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I had to quit marchin' last night. Well, if I start now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>I reckon I'm bound to catch 'em."</span>
					<span>But when he rose</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He looked at the road and saw where the march had passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>--Feet going on through the dust and the sallow mud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feet going on forever--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw that track.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was suddenly very tired.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had been tired after fighting often enough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But this was another weariness.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He rubbed his head in his hands for a minute or so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if to rub some slow thought out of his mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But it would not be rubbed away.</span>
					<span>"I'm near it," he thought,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"The hotel ain't a mile from here if Sophy's still there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well, they wouldn't give me a furlough when I ast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Well, it's been a long time."</span>
					<span>On the way to the plank hotel</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He still kept mumbling, "I can catch up to the boys."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But another thought too vague to be called a thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Washed over the mumble, drowning it, forcing it down.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The grey front door was open. No one was there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stood for a moment silent, watching the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall through the open door and pool in the dust.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"Sophy!" he called. He waited. Then he went in.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flies were buzzing over the dirty plates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the dining room and nobody there at all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It made him feel tired. He started to climb the stairs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Hey, Sophy!" he called and listened. There was a creak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From somewhere, a little noise like a dusty rat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Running across a dusty, sun-splattered board.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>His hands felt stronger.</span>
					<span>He was on the second floor</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slamming the doors of empty room after room</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And calling "Sophy!" At last he found the locked door.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He broke it down with his shoulder in a loud noise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She was lying in bed with the covers up to her chin</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And her thin hands clutching the covers.</span>
					<span>"Well, Soph," he said.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>"Well, it's you," she said.</span>
					<span>They stared at each other awhile.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"The rest of 'em's gone," she said. "They went off last night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We haven't had no business. The nigger said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Yanks were coming. They didn't have room in the cart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They said I could stay for a while and take care of things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or walk if I wanted. I guess Mr. Pollet's crazy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was talking things to himself all the time they went.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I never slept in a bed like this before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I didn't know you could sleep so soft in a bed."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>"Did they leave any shoes?" said Luke.</span>
					<span>She shook her head.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"I reckon you could maybe tear up a quilt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>I reckon they wouldn't mind."</span>
					<span>Luke grinned like a wolf.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"I reckon they hadn't better," he said. "Not much.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Got anything to eat? I'm hungry as hell."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They ate what food she could find and she washed his feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And bound them up in fresh rags.</span>
					<span>He looked at the rags.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Do for a while," he said. "Well, come along, Soph.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>We got a long way to go."</span>
					<span>Her eyes were big at him.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"The Yanks were comin'," she said. "You mean the war's over?"</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He said, "I ain't had shoes for God knows how long."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said, "If it was all Kelceys, you wouldn't mind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now I'm goin' to get me some shoes and raise me a crop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when we get back home, we'll butcher a hog.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>There's allus hogs in the mountains."</span>
					<span>"Well," she said.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>"Well, you get your duds," he said.</span>
					<span>She didn't have much.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They went along two days without being stopped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She walked pretty well for a thin sort of girl like that.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He told her she'd get fatter when they were home.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The third day, they were tramping along toward dusk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a lonely stretch of road, when she heard the horse-hoofs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Luke had heard them before and shifted his rifle then.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The officer came in sight. He was young and drawn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyes were old in their sockets. He reined his horse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"You're goin' the wrong way, soldier. What's your regiment?"</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Luke's eyes grew little. "--th Virginia," he drawled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>"But I'm on furlough."</span>
					<span>"H'm," said the officer,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>"Where are your furlough-papers?"</span>
					<span>Luke's hand slid down</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By his trigger guard. "This here's my furlough," he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resting the piece in the palm of the other hand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The officer seemed to debate a thing in his mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a long instant. Then he rode on, in silence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Luke watched him out of sight. When he was quite gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hand slid back, the rifle was shouldered again.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>The night had fallen on the narrow tent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>--Deep night of Virginia summer when the stars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are burning wax in the near, languid sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the soft flowers hardly close all night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But bathe in darkness, as a woman bathes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a warm, fragrant water and distill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their perfume still, without the fire of the sun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The army was asleep as armies sleep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>War lying on a casual sheaf of peace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a brief moment, and yet with armor on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet in the child's deep sleep, and yet so still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even the sentries seemed to walk their posts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a ghost-footfall that could match that night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The aide-de-camp knew certain lines of Greek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And other such unnecessary things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As birds and music, that are good for peace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But are not deemed so serviceable for war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was a youth with an inquisitive mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And doubtless had a failing for romance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But then he was not twenty, and such faults</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May sometimes be excused in younger men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even when such creatures die, as they have done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At one time or another, for some cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which we are careful to point out to them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much later, was no cause worth dying for,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But cannot reach them with our arguments</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because they are uneconomic dust.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So, when the aide-de-camp came toward the tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knew that he was sleepy as a dog,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet the starlight and the gathered scents</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moved in his heart--like the unnecessary</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Themes of a music fallen from a cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>In light, upon a dark water.</span>
					<span>And though he had</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some bitterness of mind to chew upon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As well as messages that he must give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before he slept, he halted in his tracks.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He saw, imprinted on the yellow light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That made the tent a hollow jack-o'-lantern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sharp, black shadow of a seated man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The profile like the profile on a bust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lee in his tent, alone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had some shadow-papers in his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But you could see he was not reading them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, if he thought, you could not read his thoughts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even as shadows, by any light that shines.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"You'd know that face among a million faces,"</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thought the still watcher, "and yet, his hair and beard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have quite turned white, white as the dogwood-bloom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That blossomed on the way to Chancellorsville</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Jackson was alive and we were young</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we were winning and the end was near.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now, I guess, the end is near enough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In spite of everything that we can do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he's alone tonight and Jackson's dead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I saw him in the Wilderness that day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he began to lead the charge himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And the men wouldn't let him.</span>
					<span>Gordon spoke</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then the men themselves began to yell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Lee to the rear--General Lee to the rear!"</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I'll hear that all my life. I'll see those paws</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grabbing at Traveller and the bridle-rein</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And forcing the calm image back from death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Reckon that's what we think of you, Marse Robert,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reckon that's what we think, what's left of us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The poor old devils that are left of us.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wonder what he thinks about it all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He isn't staring, he's just sitting there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I never knew a man could look so still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet look so alive in his repose.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It doesn't seem as if a cause could lose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When it's believed in by a man like that.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And yet we're losing.</span>
					<span>And he knows it all.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, he won't ever say it. But he knows.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I'd feel more comfortable if he'd move.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We had a chance at Spottsylvania,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We had some chances in the Wilderness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We always hurt them more than we were hurt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet we're here--and they keep coming on.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What keeps us going on? I wish I knew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perhaps you see a man like that go on</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And then you have to follow.</span>
					<span>There can't be</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many men that men have followed so.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet, what is it for? What is it for?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>What does he think?</span>
					<span>His hands are lying there</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quiet as stones or shadows in his lap.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His beard is whiter than the dogwood bloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But there is nothing ruined in his face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nothing beaten in those steady eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If he's grown old, it isn't like a man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It's more the way a river might grow old.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>My mother knew him at old dances once.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She said he liked to joke and he was dark then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dark and as straight as he can stand today.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If he would only move, I could go forward.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>You see the faces of spear-handling kings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the old books they taught us from at school;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Big Agamemnon with his curly beard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles in the cruelty of his youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Oedipus before he tore his eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I'd like to see him in that chariot-rank,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Traveller pulling at the leader-pole.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I don't think when the winged claws come down</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>They'll get a groan from him.</span>
					<span>So we go on.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the claws. And he goes on ahead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The sharp-cut profile moved a fraction now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aide-de-camp went forward on his errand.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>The years ride out from the world like couriers gone to a throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That is too far for treaty, or, as it may be, too proud;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The years marked with a star, the years that are skin and bone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The years ride into the night like envoys sent to a cloud.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Perhaps they dismount at last, by some iron ring in the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dismount and tie their stallions and walk with an armored tread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where an outlaw queen of the air receives strange embassies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under a tree of wisdom, between the quick and the dead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Perhaps they are merely gone, as the white foam flies from the bit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the sparkling noise of their riding is ever in our ears.--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men who came to the maze without foreknowledge of it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The losers and the finders, under the riding years.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They pass, and the finders lose, the losers find for a space.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are love and hate and delusion and all the tricks of the maze.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are always losers and finders. There is no abiding-place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the years are unreturning. But, here and there, there were days.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Days when the sun so shone that the statue gave its cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a bird shook wings or a woman walked with a certain mirth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the staff struck out a spring from the stones that had long been dry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the plough as before moved on from the hilltop, but its share had opened the earth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So the bird is caught for an instant, and so the bird escapes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The years are not halted by it. The losers and finders wait.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The years move on toward the sunset, the tall, far-trafficking shapes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each with a bag of news to lay at a ghostly gate.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Riders shaking the heart with the hoofs that will not cease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will you never lie stretched in marble, the hands crossed over the breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some with hounds at your feet to show that you passed in peace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And some with your feet on lions?</span>
					<span>It is time that you were at rest.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>John Vilas clucked to the scurvy rack of bones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the shafts. The rickety cart moved on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a tired insect, creaking through the dust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was another day behind them now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And any number of such days ahead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unrolling like a long block-printed cloth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pattered with field and stream and snake-rail fence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now and then, a flash of cavalry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fording a backwoods creek; a big, slow star</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mounting in silver over lonely woods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the fire smelled of pine and a cougar cried;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A warm barn, full of the sweet milky breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of cows; a lank-haired preacher on a mule;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A red-cheeked woman who rushed after them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Armed with a hot and smoking apple-pie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And would not take a penny from the old man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who held the mended reins as if they were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vast, slow-sweeping scythe of Time himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>--Old Time and the last children of his age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drawn in a rattling cart, too poor to thieve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a gaunt horse, too ancient to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over a rutted road, day after day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returning to the East from whence he came.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It was a portent in the little towns.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The time had bred odd voyagers enough;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disbanded soldiers, tramping toward the West</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In faded army blouses, singing strange songs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heroes and chickenthieves, true men and liars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some with old wounds that galled them in the rains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some who sold the wounds they never had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven times over in each new saloon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Queer, rootless families, plucked up by war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To blow along the roads like tumbleweed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who fed their wild-haired children God knows how</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But always kept a fierce and cringing cur,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Famished for scraps, to run below the cart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Horsedealers, draft-evaders, gipsymen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crooked creatures of a thousand dubious trades</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That breed like gnats from the débris of war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half-cracked herb-doctor, patent-medicine man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his accordeon and his inked silk hat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sellers of snake-oil balm and lucky rings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the old, crazy hatless wanderer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who painted "God is Love" upon the barns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the rocks, "Prepare to Meet Thy God";</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lost tribes and maverick nations of the road--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shiftless people, who are never still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But blow before the wind unquietly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And will so blow, until the last starved cur</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yaps at the last fat farmer, and lies down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With buckshot tearing at his ravening heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the slow years to pick his carcass clean</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And turn the little chapel of his bones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a dust so sifted by the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No winds that blow can sift it any more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There were unquiet people on the road,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There were outlandish strays and travellers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drifting the little towns from day to day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stopping to mend a wheel or patch a shoe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beg, steal or sleep or write God's judgments out</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And then pass on.</span>
					<span>And yet, when these three came,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>John Vilas and his daughter and her child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like snail-drawn Time, along the dusty track,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The story had gone on ahead of them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there was something in the rickety cart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the gaunt horse or in his driver's eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That made a fable of their journeying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until you heard John Vilas was that same</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lost Jew that wanders after every war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But cannot die in any, being curst.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was the skipper, who first brought the slaves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was John Brown, arisen from his stone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was the drummer who had lost his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Valley Forge and frozen in the snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rove forevermore, a dread old man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beating a phantom drum across the wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was a dozen such uncanny fetches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, while one must not talk with him too long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was no luck at all in crossing him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because, and in the end, the man was Time;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White-headed Time, stoop-shouldered on his scythe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Driving a daughter and a daughter's son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond the war, to some wrought-iron gate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where they would drop their heavy load at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>--Load of all war and all misfortune's load--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the green grass of a New England grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set on the sea-cliffs, looking toward the sea.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While, for the other tale, the woman's tale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heart-faced girl with the enormous eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roving from little town to little town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still looking for her soldier--it became</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mixed with each story of such fortune told</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind drawn blinds, by women, in the dusk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until she too grew fabulous as a song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sung to a beechwood fiddle, and all the old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Barely-recorded chants that are the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And no one poet's or musician's--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Old Dan Tucker," "The Belle of Albany,"</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The girl who died for love in the high woods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cruel Barbara Allen in her pride.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So she became a concertina tune</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Played in plank taverns by a blind, old man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A jew's-harp strain, a comb-and-banjo song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The music of a soapbox violin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shrilled out against the tree-toads and the crickets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the hot nights of June. So, though she passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unknowing, yet she left the legend-touch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bright as a splash of sumach still behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherever the gaunt horse pulled on his load.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till, later, those who knew no more of her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Living, than they might know of such removed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And singable creations as "Lord Randall,"</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Colombo," "Little Musgrave," or "Jay Gould's Daughter",</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet knew enough of her to sing about</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fit her name, Melora, to the same</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slow-dropping minor of the water and earth--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The minor of the country barber-shops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That keens above the grave of Jesse James</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the lone prairie where the cowboy died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The desolate minor of the jail-bird's song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Luscious with sorrow, and the minor notes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That tell about the tragic end of such</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As loved too well to have such cruel fathers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But were so loving, even in the dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A red-rose brier grew out of their dead hearts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And twined together in a lover's knot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all the county people to admire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every lost, waif ballad we have made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, making, scorned because it smelt of the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now would seek, but cannot make again--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So she became a legend and a name.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>John Vilas, moving always toward the East,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his last adventure, felt the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strike at his bones and warm them like the last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heat of the wood so long within the fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That long ago the brightness ate its heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet it lies and burns upon the iron</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unready still to crumble and be cool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The white, transmuted log of purest ash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still glowing with a late and borrowed flame.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"This is the sun of age," he thought, "and so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We enter our last journeys with that sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which we have watched sink down ten thousand times</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knowing he would arise like Dedalus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the first wings of morning, and exult</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like our own youth, fresh-risen from its bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And inexhaustible of space and light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now the vessel which could not be filled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By violence or desire or the great storm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Runs over with its weight of little days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when this sun sinks now, we'll sink with him</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And not get up again.</span>
					<span>I find it fit</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I, who spent the years of my desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the lost forest, seeking the lost stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With little care for Harriet or the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With little trust in safety or the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should now retrace at last, and in my age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The exact highway of my youth's escape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From everything that galled it and take on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like an old snake resuming his cast skins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The East I fled, the little towns I mocked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dust I thought was shaken from my shoes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sleepiness from which I ran away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Harriet's right and Harriet is just</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Harriet's back in that chintz-curtained room</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From which I took her, twenty years ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all the children who were always hers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because I gave them nothing but my seed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hardly heard their laughter or their tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hardly knew their faces or their names,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because I listened for the wind in the bough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because my daughters were the shooting-stars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because my sons were the forgotten streams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the wild silvers of the wilderness.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Men who go looking for the wilderness-stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And find it, should not marry or beget,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, if they do so, they may work a wrong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deeper than any mere intent of pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet, what I have sought that I have sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cannot disavouch, although it is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The double knife that cuts the giver's hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And the unwilling taker's.</span>
					<span>So I took</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My wife, long since, from that chintz-curtained room</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so she has gone back to it again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After these years, with children of those years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, being kind, she will not teach them there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To curse me, as I think, though if she did</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She could find reason in her neighbor's eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, being Harriet, she will bring them up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all such houses, till the end of time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if she had not been away at all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so, at last, she'll get the peace she should.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet, some time, a child may run away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We have had sons and daughters, she and I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, of them all, one daughter and one son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In whom our strange bloods married with the true</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marriage that is not merely sheath and sword.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rest are hers. Those two were partly mine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I taught my son to wander in the woods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till he could step the hidden paths with me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light as a whisper, indolent as Spring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would not tame his sister when I might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I let her follow patterns of leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looking for stones rejected by the wise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I kept them by me jealously and long.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And yet, the day they took him, when he sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There on his horse, before they all rode off,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was his mother who looked out of him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it was to his mother that he looked.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That is my punishment and my offence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that is how it was. And he is dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dead of a fever, buried in the South,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dead in this war I thought a whirligig</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For iron fools to play with and to kill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Other men's sons, not mine. He's buried deep.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I kept him by me jealously and long.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well, he walked well, alive. He was my son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>I'll not make tags of him.</span>
					<span>We got the news.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She could not stay beside me after that.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I see so clearly why she could not stay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So I retrace the hard steps of my youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now with this daughter, in a rattling cart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drawn by a horse as lean as famine's self,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And am an omen in the little towns--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because this daughter has too much of me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be content with bread made out of wheat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be in love and give it up for rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To live serene without a knife at heart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Such is the manner and the bound escape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those a disproportion drives unfed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the world's table, without meat or grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though both are wholesome, but who seek instead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their solitary victual like the fox.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And who at last return as I return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the ironic wagon of the years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to the pasture that they found too green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broken of every knowledge but the last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knowledge of how escape is not a door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But a slow-winding road whose hundred coils</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Return upon each other, soon or late</span>
				<br/>
				<span>--And how and when and under what cold stars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old wound bleeds beneath the armored mind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And yet, this journey is not desolate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor am I desolate in it, as we crawl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slowly from little town to little town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Always against the sun, and the horse nods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there's my daughter talking, and her child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sleeping or waking, and we stop awhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then go on awhile, and I can feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slow sun creeping through me summerlong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until, at times, I fall into a doze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awake, a daydream without apparitions</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, falling so, inhabit for a space</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A second childhood, calmer than the first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But wise in the same fashion, and so touch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a long, drowsy hour of afternoon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ripened thing, the autumn at the heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The one full star of evening that is age.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yes, I must be a second child sometimes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For as we pass and as they watch us pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seems to me their eyes make stories of us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I can hear those stories murmuring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like pigeons in a loft when I'm asleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till sometimes I must wonder for a while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I've not changed myself for someone else</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or grown a story without knowing it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, with no intermediary death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stepped out of flesh and taken on a ghost.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For at such times, it almost seems to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if I were no longer what I am</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the deluded shade of Peter Rugg</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still looking for his Boston through the storm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the strange spook of Johnny Appleseed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crept out of heaven on a windless night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see if his wild orchards prosper still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leave a heap of Baldwins and sweet russets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>--Moonglittered, scrubbed with rags of silver cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Indian magic--by the lucky doors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of such good people as take care of them--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While for my daughter, though I know she's real,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She and her story, yet, in the waking dream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She mixes with that song I used to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About the Spanish lady of old days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who loved the Englishman and sought for him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All through green England in her scarlet shoes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knowing no word of English but his name.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I hear her voice, where the guitar is mixed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the sweet, jangling mule-bells of Castile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I see her face under its high shell-comb--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then it is my daughter's--and I wake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>--And yet know, even in waking, that we are</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somewhere between a story and a dream.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And so, you see, I find a kind of peace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this last foray, will not rail at the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eat, drink and sleep, in spite of what is past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Talk with my daughter, watch the turning skies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Spanish lady found her Englishman.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well, we may find this boy I've half-forgot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although our story is another story.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So life works in us for a little while</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And then the ferment's quiet.</span>
					<span>So we do</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrongs much beyond intent, and suffer them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So we go looking for the wilderness-stone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I shall smell lilac in Connecticut</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No doubt, before I die, and see the clean</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White, reticent, small churches of my youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gardens full of phlox and mignonette,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pasture-bars I broke to run away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It was my thought to lie in an uncropped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And savage field no plough had ever scored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between a bee-tree and a cast deer-horn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was my thought to lie beside a stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too secret for the very deer to find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too solitary for remembrance.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was a dream. It does not matter now.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bury me where the soldiers of retreat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are buried, underneath the faded star,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bury me where the courtiers of escape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall down, confronted with their earth again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bury me where the fences hold the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sun sinks beyond the pasture-bars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never to fall upon the wilderness-stone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And yet I have escaped, in spite of all."</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Lucy Weatherby smoothed out clothes in a trunk</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>With a stab at her heart.</span>
					<span>The trunk was packed to the lid.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There wasn't an empty corner anywhere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pack as she would--but the blue dress wouldn't go in.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of course she'd be getting a lot of new dresses soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the blue was old--but she couldn't leave it behind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If only Henry wasn't so selfish, at times!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Henry was like all brothers and like all men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Expecting a lady to travel to Canada</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>With just one trunk and the boxes!</span>
					<span>It was too bad.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had a trunk of his own for razors and shirts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet she couldn't take two--and there were the hoops;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He kept on fussing because she wouldn't leave them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When she knew he was hoping to take all those silly books,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if you couldn't buy books wherever you went!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She pinched her cheek and stared at the trunk again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The green could come out, of course, and the blue go in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But she couldn't bear the idea of leaving the green.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The war, of course, and one thinks so much of the war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And those terrible Yankees actually at our gates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In spite of our fine, brave boys and poor Mr. Davis,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In spite of wearing old dresses for two whole years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sending the servants out to work at the forts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In spite of the cheers and the songs and the cause and the right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only, one must not be selfish. One must be brave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One must think about Henry's health and be sensible,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Henry actually thinks we can get away. . . .</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The blue or the green? She couldn't decide it yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there were all those letters to write tonight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She'd simply have to write to Clay and Huger</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About Henry's health--and how it just breaks my heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But one cannot leave one's sick brother--and afterwards,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One can always send one's address--and I'm sure if they do</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We'll give them a real, old-fashioned Richmond welcome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though they say that the British leftenants are simply sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every Southern girl is an absolute belle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They play the "Bonnie Blue Flag" at the dances there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Sara Kenefick is engaged to an earl.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She saw herself, for an instant, walking the safe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Street of a calm and British-looking town.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She had on a new dress. Her shoes and her hat were new.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A white-haired, dim-faced man in a British coat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walked beside her and looked and was listening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While she told him all about it, and hearing the guns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how they'd actually lived without butcher's meat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For weeks and weeks--and the wounded--and General Lee--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And only Henry's health had forced them at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To leave the dear South. She choked. He patted her hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hoped they would stay in Canada for a while.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The blue or the green? It was dreadfully hard to choose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with all the letters to write--and Jim Merrihew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And that nice Alabama Major--</span>
					<span>She heard the bells</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ring for a wedding, but this was a different groom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This was a white-haired man with stars on his coat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This was an Order wrapped in an English voice.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Honey, sugar-lump honey I love so dearly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You have eluded the long pursuit that sought you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You have eluded the hands that would so enclose you</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And with strange passion force you.</span>
					<span>What was this passion?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We do not know, you and I, but we would not bear it</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And are gone free.</span>
					<span>So at last, if fair girls must marry,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As young girls should, it is after another fashion</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And not with youth but wisely.</span>
					<span>So we are ransomed,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I am yours forever and you are mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Honey, sugar-lump honey.</span>
					<span>So we attain,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The white-haired bridegrooms with the stars on their coats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet have the beaus to dance with, for we like dancing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So all the world finds our wifely devotion charming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So we play all day in the heat of the sun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She held the blue dress under her chin once more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smoothed it with one white hand. Then she put it down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smiling a little. No, it couldn't go in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But she would see if she couldn't help Henry pack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if she did, the blue could go with his shirts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It hardly mattered, leaving some shirts behind.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Sherman's buzzin' along to de sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jubili, Jubilo!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sherman's buzzin' along to de sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like Moses ridin' on a bumblebee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Settin' de prisoned and de humble free!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hit's de year of Jubilo!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Massa was de whale wid de big inside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jubili, Jubilo!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Massa was de lion and de lion's hide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But de Lord God smacked him in his hardheart pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And de whale unswallered, and de lion died!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hit's de year of Jubilo!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Oh, hit don't matter if you's black or tan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jubili, Jubilo!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hit don't matter if you's black or tan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When you hear de noise of de freedom-ban'</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You's snatched baldheaded to de Promise Lan',</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hit's de year of Jubilo!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Oh, hit don't matter if you pine or ail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jubili, Jubilo!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hit don't matter if you pine or ail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hit don't matter if you's been in jail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>De Lord's got mercy for your mumblin' tale!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hit's de year of Jubilo!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Every nigger's gwine to own a mule,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jubili, Jubilo!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Every nigger's gwine to own a mule,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An' live like Adam in de Golden Rule,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An' send his chillun to de white-folks' school!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In de year of Jubilo!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fall down on your knees and bless de Lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jubili, Jubilo!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall down on your knees and bless de Lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dat chased old Pharaoh wid a lightnin'-sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rose up Izzul fum de withered gourd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hit's de year of Jubilo!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Shout thanksgivin' and shout it loud!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jubili, Jubilo!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shout thanksgivin' and shout it loud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We was dead and buried in de Lazrus-shroud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But de Lord came down in a glory-cloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An' He gave us Jubilo!</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>So Sherman goes from Atlanta to the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the red-earth heart of the land, through the pine-smoke haze</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Of the warm, last months of the year.</span>
					<span>In the evenings</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The skies are green as the thin, clear ice on the pools</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That melts to water again in the heat of noon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A few black trees are solemn against those skies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soldiers feel the winter touching the air</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>With a little ice.</span>
					<span>But when the sun has come up,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When they halt at noonday, mopping their sweaty brows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The skies are blue and soft and without a cloud.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Strange march, half-war, half trooping picnic-parade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cutting a ruinous swathe through the red earth land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>March of the hardy bummers and coffee-coolers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, having been told to forage, loot as they can</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leave a wound that rankles for sixty years.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>March of the honest, who did not loot when they could</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so are not remembered in Southern legend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rough-bearded Sherman riding the red-earth roads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Writing home that his rascals are fat and happy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saying or else not saying that war is hell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saying he almost trembles himself to think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of what will happen when Charleston falls in the hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those same rascals--and yet, when we read that march,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hardly the smoking dragon he has been called,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the mere rough-handed man who rode with a hard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bit through the land, unanxious to spare his foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor grimly anxious to torture for torture's sake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smashing this and that,--and yet, in the end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Giving such terms to the foe struck down at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the men in Washington disavow them and him</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>For over-kindness.</span>
					<span>So now, through the pine-smoke Fall,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The long worm of his army creeps toward Savannah</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Leaving its swathe behind.</span>
					<span>In the ruined gardens</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The buried silver lies well hid in the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A looter pocks bullet-marks in an old oil-portrait.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A woman wails and rages against the thieves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who carry her dead child's clothes on their drunken bayonets.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A looter swings from a pine tree for thefts too crude.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fresh-faced boy gets scars he will carry long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hauling a crippled girl from a burning house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But gets no thanks but hate from the thing he saved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And everywhere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A black earth stirs, a wind blows over black earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wind blows into black faces, into old hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knotted with long rheumatics, cramped on the hoe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into old backs bent double over the cotton,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wind of freedom, the wind of the jubilo.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They stray from the lost plantations like children strayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grinning and singing, following the blue soldiers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They steal from the lonesome cabins like runaways</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laden with sticks and bundles and conjur-charms;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A huge black mother carries her sucking child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrapped in a quilt, a slim brown girl and her lover</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wander November woods like Adam and Eve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Living on roots and rabbits and liberty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An old grey field hand dimly plods through the mud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looking for some vague place he has heard about</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Linkum sits at a desk in his gold silk hat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a bag of silver dollars in either hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For every old grey field hand that comes to him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All God's chillun got shoes there and fine new clothes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All God's chillun got peace there and roastin'-ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hills of barbecue, rivers of pot-licker,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nobody's got to work there, never no more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His feet are sore with the road but he stumbles on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hundred, a thousand others stumble as he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chanting, dizzied, drunken with a strange fever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A child's delight, a brightness too huge to grasp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hidden nation, untaught, unrecognized,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Free at last, but not yet free with the free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ignorant, joyful, wronged, child-minded and searching,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Searching the army's road for this new wild thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That means so much but can't be held in the hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That must be there, that yet is so hard to find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This dream, this pentecost changing, this liberty.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Some wander away to strange death or stranger life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some wander awhile and starve and come back at last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some stay by the old plantation but will not work</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the great disgust of masters and mistresses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sing idly, gamble, sleep through the lazy hours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting for friendly heaven to rain them down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mule and the forty acres of their desire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some, faithful beyond the bond that they never signed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hold to that bond in ruin as in the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steal food for a hungry mistress, keep her alive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keep the house alive, try to pick the weeds from the path,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gather the wood and chop it and make the fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pitying scorn for the runaway sheep of freedom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freedom's a ghost and freedom's a foolish talk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What counts is making the fire as it should be made. . . .</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, blackskinned epic, epic with the black spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I cannot sing you, having too white a heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet, some day, a poet will rise to sing you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sing you with such truth and mellowness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>--Deep mellow of the husky, golden voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crying dark heaven through the spirituals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soft mellow of the levee roustabouts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing at night against the banjo-moon--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That you will be a match for any song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sung by old, populous nations in the past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stand like hills against the American sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lay your black spear down by Roland's horn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile, in Georgia, the scythe of the march mows on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Southern papers discount it as best they can.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lincoln is anxious, Davis more anxious still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The war is in its last winter of strife and pain.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Cudjo buried the silverware</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a graveyard night of sultry air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the turned sods smelled of the winter damp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Mary Lou Wingate held the lamp.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They worked with a will. They did not speak.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The light was yellow. The light was weak.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tomb-light casting a last, brief flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the grave of Wingate fame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The silver bowl of the Wingate toasts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spoons worn hollow by Wingate ghosts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sconce and ladle and bead-rimmed plate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the English mark and the English weight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The round old porringer, dented so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the first milk-teeth of the long ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the candlesticks of Elspeth Mackay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That she brought with her youth on her wedding-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To light the living of Wingate Hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the mornings break and the twilights fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the night and the river have memories. . . .</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There was a spook in Cudjo's eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he lowered the chests where they must lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And patted the earth back cunningly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knew each chest and its diverse freight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a blind man knows his own front gate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, decade by decade and piece by piece,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With paste and shammy and elbow-grease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had made them his, by the pursed-up lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the tireless, polishing fingertips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till now as he buried them, each and all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What he buried was Wingate Hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself and the moon and the toddy-sippers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The river-mist and the dancing-slippers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old Marse Billy and Mary Lou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every bit of the world he knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Master and lady and house and slave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All smoothed down in a single grave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was finished at length. He shook his head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Mistis, reckon we's done," he said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They looked at each other, black and white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a slow-paced moment across the light.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then he took the lamp and she smoothed her shawl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he lit her back to the plundered Hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pray, with her old serene observance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the mercy of God upon faithful servants</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a justice striking all Yankees dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On her cold, worn knees by the great carved bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where she had lain by a gentleman's side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wife and mother and new-come bride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sick with the carrying, torn with the borning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waked by the laughter on Christmas morning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through love and temper and joy and grief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the years gone by like the blowing leaf.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She finished her prayer with Louisa's child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, when she had risen, she almost smiled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She struck her hand on the bedstead head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"They won't drive me from my house," she said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the wood rang under her wedding-ring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then she stood for a moment, listening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if for a step, or a gentleman's name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But only the gnats and the echoes came.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Cudjo, being less fortified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Covered his ears with his hands and tried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shut the noise of the risen wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the trouble of his mind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thought, "Ain't right for dat wind to blow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She wasn't blowing awhile ago.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jus' riz up fum de earth somewhere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When we buried dat orphan silver dere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Got to hide it, and so we tried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But silver like dat don't like to hide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silver's ust to be passed aroun'</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Don't like lyin' in lonesome groun',</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wants to come back to de Hall, all right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silver, I always shone you bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You could see yo'self in de shine--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silver, it wasn't no fix of mine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Don't you come projeckin' after me!"</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His eyes were shut but he still could see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slow chests rising out of the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With an ominous clatter of silver sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The locks undoing, the bags unfastening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every knife and platter and spoon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clinking out of the grave and hastening</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to the Hall, in the witches' moon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the wind in the chimney played such tricks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That it was no wind, be it soft or loud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Elspeth seeking her candlesticks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All night long in her ruffled shroud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deep voice haunting the ocean-shell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To give her judgment and weave her spell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<i>"Thrift and love for the house and the chief</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<i>And a scone on the hob for the son of grief,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<i>But a knife in the ribs for the pleasant thief."</i>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Cudjo heard it, and Cudjo shook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Cudjo felt for the Holy Book,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the wind blew on without peace or rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blowing the straws from the dried-up nest.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Bailey, tramping along with Sherman's bummers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grumbled and found life pleasant and hummed his tune.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was well, the blood ran in him, he ate for ten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He and the gang had salvaged a wall-eyed nig</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fix their victuals--and if the captain was on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The captain had a blind eye.</span>
					<span>Last night it was turkey,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The night before it was duck--well, you couldn't expect</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such things to keep on forever, but while they did</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was pretty soft--it was war like it ought to be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Old Man marched 'em hard, but that was all right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Old Man knew his job and the nig was a buster</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the gang was as good a gang as you'd hope to find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None of your coffee-coolers and straggle-tails</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But a regular gang that ran like an eight-day clock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh it was gravy, it was the real duck soup,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marchin' into Atlanta after the fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then this marchin'--well, they were due for it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And he was a sergeant now.</span>
					<span>And up in his pack</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were souvenirs for the red-haired widow in Cairo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some of 'em bought and some just sort of picked up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not a dam one stolen, to call it stealin'.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wasn't a coffee-cooler or a slick Susio.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poor little kid--she'd had a pretty tough time--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cry like a fool when she gets a squint at that brooch--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They said you couldn't tell about widows much,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But what the hell--he wasn't a barnyard virgin--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He liked a woman who'd been over the bumps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And kept her get-up-and-git and her sassiness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spitfire-sweetie, you're my valentine now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bet the kids have red hair--well you can't help that--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they'll all look like Poppa or he'll know why.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He mused a moment, thinking of Ellyat now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was another kid and a crazy kid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sort of missed him, hope he's gettin' it soft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must have got a banger at Gettysburg,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrote me a letter a couple of months ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maybe six, I dunno, I sort of forget.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ought to give him his old spread-eagle now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darn good kid, but done enough for his pay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hope he finds that girl he was talkin' about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sounds like a pretty good piece for a storm-and-strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Skinny, though--we like 'em more of a weight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Don't we, Carrots?</span>
					<span>Well, it's all in a life.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ought to write him sometime if we get a chance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wish we was West--we'd have him out to the weddin',</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Me and Bessie, show him the Cairo girls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hand him the fireman's grip and give him a time.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His heart was overflowing with charity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But his throat was dry as the bottom of his canteen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was a big, white house, some way from the road. . . .</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He found his captain, saluted and put his question.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The captain's eyes were satiric but not displeased.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"All right, Sergeant, take your detail and forage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We're running low on bacon, it seems to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if you happen to find a pigeon or two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remember the Colonel's penchant for pigeon-pie.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But don't waste time and don't put your hopes too high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Nth Corps must have gone by there hours ago</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they're the biggest thieves in this whole, wide army.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You'll be back, in ranks, all sober, in just two hours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or you won't have stripes. And if I find one more man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trying to take a pet with him on this march,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I don't care if it's only a treetoad, I'll skin him alive."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Bailey came to the door of Wingate Hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the high wind blowing against him and gave his orders.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Make it quick now, boys--don't cut any monkeyshines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But be sure and get the pigeons if they're around.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clark, you and Ellis stay with me by the door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I'm going to talk to the house if there's anyone left."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He knocked and called. There was a long, heavy silence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Hey you, the house!" The silence made him feel queer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He cursed impatiently and pushed at the door.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It swung wide open. He turned to Ellis and Clark.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"I'm goin' in," he said. "If you hear me yell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Come in bilin'."</span>
					<span>They watched him with mocking eyes.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Wish to hell they'd make me a sergeant, Clark,"</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>"A three-stripe souvenir sergeant."</span>
					<span>"Aw, hell," said Clark,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Bailey's all right. He'll let us in on the juice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If there's any lawful juice that a man could get."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Sure he's all right. Who says that he ain't all right!"</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>"But all the same, he's a sergeant."</span>
					<span>Bailey, meanwhile</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was roving like a lost soul through great, empty rooms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And staring at various objects that caught his eye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Funny old boy with a wig, hung up on the wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Queer sort of chairs, made your hands feel dirty to touch 'em</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Though they were faded.</span>
					<span>Everything faded and old</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And quiet--and the wind blowin'--he moved as on tiptoe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Though he couldn't say why he did.</span>
					<span>Old workbasket there.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He opened it idly--most of the things were gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But there was a pair of little, gold-mounted scissors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made like a bird, with the blades the beak of the bird.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He picked it up and opened and shut the blades.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hadn't rusted--sort of handsome and queer--</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Bessie would certainly like it--</span>
					<span>He held it a minute.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wouldn't take up any room. Then he frowned at the thing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Aw hell," he said, "I got enough souvenirs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I ain't no damn coffee-cooler."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He started to put the scissors back in the case</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And turned to face a slight grey-headed old woman</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dressed in black, with eyes that burned through his skin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a voice that cut at his mind like a rawhide whip,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calling him fifty different kinds of a thief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Yankee devil and liar and God knows what,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tearing the throat of her dress with her thin old hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And telling him he could shoot her down like a dog</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he'd steal her children's things over her dead body.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My God, as if you went around shootin' old women</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>For fun, my God!</span>
					<span>He couldn't even explain.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She was like all of 'em, made him sick in his lunch.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Oh hell," he yelled. "Shut up about your damn scissors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>This is a war, old lady!"</span>
					<span>"That's right," she said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Curse a helpless female, you big, brave soldier."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Well, what was a man to do?</span>
					<span>He got out of the house,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sore and angry, mean as a man could feel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But her voice still followed, reviling, making him burn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Now, where in hell was that detail?</span>
					<span>He saw them now,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All except Clark and Ellis, gathered around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A white-polled nigger wringing his hands and weeping.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One man had a neck-wrung pigeon stuffed in his blouse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Well, that was something.</span>
					<span>He laid his hand on the nigger.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Hey, Uncle, where's the well? You folks got a well?"</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the nigger just kept on crying like an old fool.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"He thinks we're goin' to scalp him," said one of the men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"I told him twict that he's free but the shine won't listen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I give him some money, too, but he let it drop.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rest of 'em run away when the army came."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"Well, tell him he's safe and make him rustle some water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I'm dry as a preacher's tongue. Where's Ellis and Clark?"</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He found Clark solemnly prodding the hard dirt floor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a negro cabin, while Ellis lighted the task</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>With a splinter of burning pine.</span>
					<span>His rage exploded</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In boiling lava. They listened respectfully.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"And next time, I give you an order," he ended up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>"Why you ---- ---- ----"</span>
					<span>Clark wiped his face with his sleeve.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Sorry, Sergeant," he said in an awed, low voice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Well you better be! What the hell do you think you're at,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Playin' tit-tat-toe or buryin' somebody's dog?"</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Well, Sergeant," said Ellis, humbly, "I allus heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They buried stuff, sometimes, under these here cabins.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Well, I thought we could take a look--well--"</span>
					<span>"Huh?" said Bailey</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He seized the torch and looked at the trodden floor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For an instant. Then his pride and his rage returned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Hell's fire!" he said, and threw the splinter aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"That's just about what you would think, you and Clark.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come out of there on the double! Yes, I said you!"</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They were halfway down the driveway when Ellis spoke.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Sergeant," he said. "There's somethin' on fire back there."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bailey stopped--looked back--a smoke-puff climbed in the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And the wind was high.</span>
					<span>He hesitated a moment.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cabin must have caught from the burning splinter.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then he set his jaw. Well, suppose the cabin had caught?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>--Damned old woman in black who called him a thief.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Serve her right if all her cabins burnt up.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The house wouldn't catch--and here they were, losing time--</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"Oh well," he said. "That nigger'll put it out.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It ain't our detail--mosey along with it there--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Cap won't mind if we run it on him a little,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now we got the Colonel's squab, but we better step."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They hurried along. The smoke rose higher behind them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wind blew the burning flakes on Wingate Hall.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Sally Dupré stared out of her bedroom window</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As she had stared many times at that clump of trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saw the smoke rise out of it, thick and dark.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They hadn't had much trouble at Appleton.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was too far off the main road--and, as for the slaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those who straggled after the troops were better away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aunts complained, of course--well, the aunts complained.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were old, and, at least, they had a man in the house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even if the man were but crippled old Uncle Paul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was the end of the world for him and the aunts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>It wasn't for her.</span>
					<span>The years had worn on her youth,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much had worn, but not the crook from her smile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor the hidden lightness out of her narrow feet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She looked at the smoke again, and her eyes were grey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then they were black as that smoke. She felt the fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Run on her flesh. "It's Wingate Hall and it's burning!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>House that married my lover before he saw me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You are burning, burning away in a little smoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burning the wall between us with your fierce burning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burning the strife between us in your black flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Burning down."</span>
					<span>She trod for an instant there</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A light glass floor of omen, brighter than sleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Over a hurtless fire.</span>
					<span>Then she caught her breath.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flesh was cool, the blackness died from her eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"We'll have to get the slaves if the slaves will go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know Ned will. I'm not sure about Bob or Jim.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uncle Paul must give me his pistol. I'll have to start them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They won't go without me. The aunts won't be any use.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why wouldn't she come over here when we all first heard?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know why she wouldn't. I never liked her so much.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Hurry, Sally!"</span>
					<span>She ran downstairs like the wind.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They worked at the Hall that night till the dawn came up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two smoke-stained women, Cudjo and Bob and Ned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when the dawn had risen, the Hall was gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Elspeth's candles would not light it again.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Wingate wearily tried to goad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bag of bones on a muddy road</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the grey and April sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Bristol hummed in his irony</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"If you want a good time, jine the cavalry!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well, we jined it, and here we go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last event in the circus-show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bareback boys in the burnin' hoop</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mounted on cases of chicken-croup,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rovin' remains of the Black Horse Troop!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though the only horse you could call real black</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is the horsefly sittin' on Shepley's back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, women and children, do not fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They'll feed the lions and us, next year.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, women and children, dry your eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Southern gentleman never dies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He just lives on by his strength of will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a damn ole rooster too tough to kill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or a brand-new government dollar-bill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That you can use for a trousers-patch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or lightin' a fire, if you've got a match,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or makin' a bunny a paper collar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or anythin' else--except a dollar.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Old folks, young folks, never you care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Yanks are here and the Yanks are there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But no Southern gentleman knows despair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He just goes on in his usual way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eatin' a meal every fifteenth day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And showin' such skill in his change of base</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he never gets time to wash his face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While he fights with a fury you'd seldom find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except in a Home for the Crippled Blind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And can whip five Yanks with a palmleaf hat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only the Yanks won't fight like that.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ladies and gentlemen, here we go!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last event in the minstrel show!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Georgia's genuine gamboliers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Ladies and gentlemen, dry those tears!)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See the sergeant, eatin' the hay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his faithful horse, in a lifelike way!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See the general, out for blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And try to tell the man from the mud!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See the platoon in its savage lair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A half-grown boy on a wheezy mare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ladies and gentlemen, pass the hat!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We've got one trick that you won't forget,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>'The Vanishin' Commissariat'</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nobody's found the answer yet!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here we go, here we go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last parade of the circus-show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Longstreet's orphans, Lee's everlastin's</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half cast-iron and half corn-pone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if gettin' to heaven means prayer and fastin's</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We ought to get there on the fasts alone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Here we go with our weddin' bells,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mr. Davis's immortelles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mr. Lincoln's Thanksgivin' turkey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Run right ragged but actin' perky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chased right handsome, but still not carved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>--We had fleas, but the fleas all starved.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We had rations and new recruits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uniforms and cavalry-boots,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must have mislaid, for we can't find 'em.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They all went home with their tails behind 'em.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here we are, like the old man's mutton,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pretty well sheared, but not past buttin',</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lee's last invalids, heart and hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All wropped up in a woolen band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, Dixie land . . . oh, Dixie land! . . ."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He tossed his hat and caught it again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Wingate recalled, without grief or pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or any quietus but memory</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lucy, under another sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White and gold as a lily bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Giving toy ribbons to all her dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She had been pretty and she was gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the dead were here--and the dead rode on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over a road of mud and stones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each one horsed on a bag of bones.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lucy, you carried a golden head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I am free of you, being dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Father's back in that cluttered hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the beds are solid from wall to wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the scrubbed old floor has a rusty stain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He'll never ride with the dogs again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call Bathsheba or Planter's Child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the old, high quaver that drives them wild</span>
				<br/>
				<span>--Rocketing hounds on a red-hot scent--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After such wounds, men do not ride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I think that his heart was innocent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know he rode by the riverside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calling Blue Ruin or Georgia Lad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the huntsman's crotchet that sets them mad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His face was ruddy--his face is white--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wonder if Father died last night?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That cloud in the sky is a thunderhead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The world I knew is a long time dead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Shepley looks like a knife on guard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reckon he's taking it mighty hard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reckon he loved her and no mistake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glad it isn't my wedding cake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainscott oughtn't to plague him so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Means all right but he doesn't know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Here we go, here we go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last events of the minstrel-show!"</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Shepley suddenly turned his head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Mr. Bristol's funny," he said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The voice was flat with an injury.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bristol stared at him, puzzledly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"What's the matter with you, Huger?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lost your dog or your rosy cheeks?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haven't been human for weeks and weeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I'll sing you a hymn, if you're so inclined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the rest of the boys don't seem to mind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are you feelin' poorly or just unkind?"</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Shepley looked at him with the blind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eyes of a man too long at war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And too long nursing a secret sore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Mr. Bristol's funny," said he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a level voice of enmity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bristol laughed, but his face grew red.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Well, if you take it like that--" he said.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"Here we go, here we go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old Confederate minstrel-show!"</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His mouth was merry, he tossed his hat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Belles skedaddled and left us flat--"</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Shepley leaned from his swaying hips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flicked him over the singing lips.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Will you take it?" he said, "or let it go?"</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You never could sing for shucks, you know."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The color drained out of Bristol's face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bowed with an odd, old-fashioned grace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Name your people and choose your land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I don't take a slap from God's own hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mr. Shepley, your servant, sir."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They stared at each other across a blur.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The troop stared with them, halted and still.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A rider lunged from the top of the hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dusty man with a bandaged hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Spilling his orders.</span>
					<span>"Who's in command?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well, it doesn't signify, more or less.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You can hold the Yanks for a while, I guess.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make 'em think you're the whole rear guard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If you can do it--they're pressin' hard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And somebody's got to lose some hair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keep 'em away from that bend down there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As long as a horse or a man can stand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You might give 'em a charge, if you think you can,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we'll meet sometime in the Promised Land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I can't spare you another man."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bristol whistled, a shrill, sweet slur.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Beg to acknowledge the orders, sir.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boys, we're booked for the shivaree.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give our regards to the infantry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tell Marse Robert, with fortitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We stacked up pretty as hickory-wood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While might I ask, while bein' polite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How many Yank armies we aim to fight?"</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"Well," said the other, "about a corps.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roughly speakin'--there may be more."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"Thank you," said Bristol, "that's mighty sweet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You will not remain at the mourner's seat?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No sir? Well, I imagined not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For from this time hence it will be right hot.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He turned to Shepley with his punctilious</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Air of the devil turned supercilious</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the damned display a vulgar nettlement.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Sir, I regret that our little settlement</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must be postponed for a fitter season,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But war and necessity know no reason,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And should we survive in this comin' fracas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I'll do you the honors--you damned old jackass!"</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Shepley grinned at his sometime friend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They took the cover they must defend.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wingate, fighting from tree to tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Felt a red-hot skewer surgeon his knee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And felt his shoulder hitting the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rolled on his side and made a sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dimly seeing through failing sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last brief passion of his last fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One Cotter dying, the other dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the brains run out of his shattered head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stuart Cazenove trying to squirm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His way to the road like a scythe-cut worm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weakly humming "Cadet Rousselle",</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shot through the belly and half in hell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Shepley croaked through a bloody spray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Come on, you bastards, and get your pay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We've fought you mounted and fought you standin'</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I got a hole I could put my hand in--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they're comin', Wayne--and it hurts my head--"</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bristol looked at him, lying dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Got the start of me, Shep," he said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Dirty welchers, killin' Huger</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before we could settle up properly."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stooped to the body and took its pistol</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Wingate saw, through a rising mist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last, cold madness of Wainscott Bristol,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walking out like a duellist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his torn coat buttoned up at the throat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if it were still the broadcloth coat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Duellists button to show no fleck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of telltale white at the wrists or neck.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He stepped from his cover and dropped his hat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Yanks, come get it!" he said and spat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While his pistols cracked with a single crack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Here we go on the red dog's back!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High, low, jack and the goddam game."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then the answering volley came.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wingate waked from a bloodshot dream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were touching his leg and he heard his scream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A blue-chinned man said a word or two.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Well now, Johnny, you ought to do</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the sawbones comes with his movin'-van,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you're lucky you're livin', little man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But why the hell did you act so strict,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fightin' like that when you know you're licked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And where's the rest of your damn brigade?"</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The voice died out as the ripples fade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the flow of the running stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Wingate sank to the bloodshot dream.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Richmond is fallen--Lincoln walks in its streets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone, unguarded, stops at George Pickett's house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knocks at George Pickett's door. George Pickett has gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the strange, gaunt figure talks to George Pickett's wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A moment--she thinks she is dreaming, seeing him there--</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>"Just one of George Pickett's old friends, m'am."</span>
					<span>He turns away.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She watches him down the street with wondering eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The red light falls upon him from the red sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Houses are burning, strange shadows flee through the streets.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A gang of loafers is broaching a liquor-barrel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a red-lit square. The liquor spills on the cobbles.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They try to scoop it up in their dirty hands.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A long, blue column tramps by, shouting "John Brown's Body."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The loafers scatter like wasps from a half-sucked pear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Come back when the column is gone.</span>
					<span>A half-crazy slave</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mounts on a stoop and starts to preach to the sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A white-haired woman shoos him away with a broom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He mumbles and reels to the shadows.</span>
					<span>A general passes,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His escort armed with drawn sabres. The sabres shine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>In the red, low light.</span>
					<span>Two doors away, down the street,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A woman is sobbing the same long sob all night</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Beside a corpse with crossed hands.</span>
					<span>Lincoln passes on.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On the way to Appomattox, the ghost of an army</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Staggers a muddy road for a week or so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through fights and weather, dwindling away each day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a brief while Davis is with them and then he goes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be tracked by his private furies into the last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sad farce of his capture, and, later, to wear his chains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Benjamin is with them for some few days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still sleek, still lively, still impeccably dressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taking adversity as he took success</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the silk-ribbed fan of his slight, unchangeable smile.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind that fan, his mind weighs war and defeat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>In an old balance.</span>
					<span>One day he is there and smiling.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The next he is gone as if he had taken fernseed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And walked invisible so through the Union lines.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You will not find that smile in a Northern prison</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though you seek from now till Doomsday. It is too wise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You will find the chief with the chin like John Calhoun's,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gadfly-stung, tormented by hostile fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You will find many gallant blockheads and tragic nobles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not the black-eyed man with life in his eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So this week, this death-march, these final, desperate strokes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These last blood-spots on the harvest--until, at length,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The battered grey advance guard, hoping to break</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A last, miraculous hole through the closing net,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sees Ord's whole corps as if risen out of the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Before them, blocking all hope.</span>
					<span>The letters are written,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The orders given, while stray fighting goes on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grey men and blue men die in odd clumps of ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Before the orders can reach them.</span>
					<span>An aide-de-camp</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeks a suitable house for the council from a chance farmer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The first one found is too dirty to please his mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He picks another.</span>
					<span>The chiefs and the captains meet,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lee erect in his best dress uniform,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His dress-sword hung at his side and his eyes unaltered.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chunky Grant in his mudsplashed private's gear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>With the battered stars on his shoulders.</span>
					<span>They talk a while</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Of Mexico and old days.</span>
					<span>Then the terms are stated.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lee finds them generous, says so, makes a request.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His men will need their horses for the spring-ploughing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Grant assents at once.</span>
					<span>There is no parade of bright sword's</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Given or taken. Grant saw that there should not be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>It is over, then. . . .</span>
					<span>Lee walks from the little room.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His face is unchanged. It will not change when he dies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But as he steps on the porch and looks toward his lines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He strikes his hands together once with a sound. . . .</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In the room he has left, the blue men stare at each other</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a space of heartbeats, silent. The grey ride off.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are gone--it is over. . . .</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The room explodes like a bomb, they are laughing and shouting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yelling strange words, dragging chairs and tables outdoors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bearded generals waltzing with one another</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a brief, wild moment, punching each others' ribs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Everyone talking at once and nobody listening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>"It's over--it's done--it's finished!"</span>
					<span>Then, order again.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grey ghost-army falls in for the last time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Marching to stack its arms.</span>
					<span>As the ranks move forward</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blue guns go to "Present." Gordon sees the gesture.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sweeps his sabre down in the full salute.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There are no cheers or words from blue lines or grey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only the sound of feet. . . .</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>It is over, now. . . .</span>
					<span>The arms are stacked from the war.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A few bronzed, tattered grey men, weeping or silent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tear some riddled bits of cloth from the color-staffs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And try to hide them under their uniforms.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Jake Diefer, ploughing, a day of the early Spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smelt April steam from the ground as he turned it up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wondered how the new forty would do this year.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The stump of his left arm ached in the living wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>It was not a new pain.</span>
					<span>When he got back to the house</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The woman would ease it some with her liniments</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But there wasn't much you could do.</span>
					<span>The boy had been smart.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The boy had fixed the jigger so he could plough.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It wasn't an arm you could show to company</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a regular-looking hand, but it did the work.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The woman still hankered after the varnished one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They'd seen that day in the Philadelphia store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>--Well, he'd tried it on, and it was a handsome arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And, if the new forty did well--</span>
					<span>Meanwhile, the huge</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Muscles of his right shoulder bulged with the strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>As the plough sheared on.</span>
					<span>Sometimes, the blade of the plough</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still turned up such odd harvest as bullets leave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A spoilt canteen, the brass of a cartridge-pouch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An eyeless skull, too white for the grin it wore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But these were rarer now.</span>
					<span>They had cleaned the well.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>They could drink from the well again.</span>
					<span>The earth was in plough.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He turned his team and started the backward furrow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was clumsy still, in some matters, but he could manage.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>This year he'd see his own wheat.</span>
					<span>He thought to himself:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"You ain't the feller you was but the ground looks good.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It smells like good plantin' weather. We cleaned the well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maybe some time we'll get you that varnished arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Sundays, maybe. It'd look good on Sundays."</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He gazed ahead.</span>
					<span>By the end of the farther fence</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A ragamuffin-something leaned on the rail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Regarding him and his team.</span>
					<span>"Tramp feller," he thought,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Colored man, too--well, he can't hang around this farm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him or no other tramps. I wish I could get</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>An honest to God cheap hired man."</span>
					<span>The team drew near.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The negro did not move.</span>
					<span>Jake halted the team.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They stared at each other. One saw a crippled ox,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other a scar-faced spectre with haunted eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still dressed in the rags of a shoddy uniform.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>"Well, feller?" said Jake.</span>
					<span>The negro said "'Scuse me, Sarjun."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He scratched his head with the wreck of a forage-cap.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>His eyes remembered a darkness.</span>
					<span>"Huh!" said Jake,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Sharply, "Where did you get it?"</span>
					<span>The negro shrank.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"I was in de Crater, boss," he said with a dull</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stain in his voice. "You mebbe heard about us.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You mebbe heard of de Crater at Petersburg.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I doan' like thinkin' about it. You need a fiel'-han'?"</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Jake thought for a moment. "Crater," he said at last.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>"Yuh, I heard about that Crater."</span>
					<span>The wind blew on,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurting his arm. "I wasn't to there," he said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>"I knew some boys that was there."</span>
					<span>The negro said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"I'd work for my keep, boss, honest. I knows a team.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I knows how to work. I got hurt bad in de Crater</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But I knows how to work a farm."</span>
					<span>He coughed and was dumb.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jake looked at him as he might have looked at a horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Measuringly.</span>
					<span>"I ain't runnin' a hospital,"</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said, in an aggrieved voice. "You was to the Crater.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I seen the way you colored folks farm down South.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It ain't no way to farm. You ought to be et.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We'll eat you up to the house when it's mealin'-time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I don't know where we'll sleep you. How do I know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>You can work your keep?"</span>
					<span>The negro said nothing at all.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>His eyes had resumed their darkness.</span>
					<span>"Huddup!" said Jake,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>As the team swung round.</span>
					<span>"Dat's ploughin'!" the negro said.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Jake spat. "The woman'll fix you a snack to eat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>If you holler the house."</span>
					<span>The negro shook his head.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"I'll wait till you's done furrowin', boss," he said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Mebbe I kin help you unhitch when it's time for dat."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"Well," said Jake, "I ain't payin' a hired man much."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>"Dey call me Spade," said the negro.</span>
					<span>The plough went on.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The negro watched it, cutting the furrow clean.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Jack Ellyat, an old cudgel in his fist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walked from the town, one day of melting ice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Past fields still patched with old snow but warm in the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His heart and mind being something like those fields. . . .</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind him, in the town, the spangled flags</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still fluttered or hung limp for fallen Richmond,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here or there, in corners, you could see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The burst firecracker-cases, rotten with rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The guttered stumps of torches flung away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And other odds and ends of celebration</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Not yet swept up.</span>
					<span>The old cannon in the Square</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still had a blackened mouth from its salutes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The little boys would not be good all week</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And everything wore airs of Monday morning. . . .</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Jack Ellyat, remembering it all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was glad enough when he got past the houses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And could see nothing but the road ahead</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Going up hills and down.</span>
					<span>"It's over now.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finished for good. Well, I was part of it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Well, it is over."</span>
					<span>When he reached the crest</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Long Hill, he paused and felt the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blow on his face, and leaned upon his stick,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Gazing at troubled Spring.</span>
					<span>He carried still</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wounds of a sort, some healed into the scars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some that hardly would be healed awhile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being in stuff few surgeries can reach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he was well enough, although the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Felt colder than it had in other Springs.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"Oh, yes," he thought, "I guess that I'm all right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I guess I'm lucky. I remember once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coming along this road with poor old Ned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before they fired on Sumter. Well, it's over.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>I was a part of it."</span>
					<span>He flipped a stone</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down toward the hill and watched it strike and strike</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then lie quiet, while his mind recalled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The long, white, bloodless months of getting well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the strange feel of first civilian clothes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well, that was over, too, and he was back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And everybody knew he'd settled down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only he couldn't stand it any more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He had a picture of Melora's face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dim with long looking-at, a carried image,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He tried to see it now, but it was faint.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He'd tried to find her but he couldn't find her.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Couldn't get any news while he was sick,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then, at last, the news that they were gone--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That and no more--and nobody knew where.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He saw the clock upon the mantelpiece</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back in the house, ticking its fettered time</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>To fettered Phaëton.</span>
					<span>"I'll settle down.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will forget. I'll wear my riddled coat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fourth of Julys and have boys gape at me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I'll drink and eat and sleep, marry a girl;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be a good lawyer, wear the hunger out.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I hardly knew her. It was years ago.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why should the hunger stay? A dozen men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might find a dozen girls and lose them so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never once think of it, but perhaps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a dim fragrance, lost with their first youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A seashell in a box of cedarwood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A silver mist that vanished with the day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It was such years ago. She must have changed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>I know that I have changed.</span>
					<span>We find such things</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lose them, and must live in spite of it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only a fool goes looking for the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That blew across his heartstrings yesterday,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or breaks his hands in the obscure attempt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To dig the knotted roots of Time apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hoping to resurrect the golden mask</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the lost year inviolate from the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only a fool drives horses in the sky."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And here he was, out walking on this road</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For no more reason than a crazy yarn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just heard, about some gipsy travellers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Going through towns and looking for a soldier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even and supposing it were she . . .</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He saw Melora walking down from the wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the sun behind her, low in the western cloud.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw the long shadow that her slight body made.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The fetters fell like straws from the clock of time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The horses moved from the gate.</span>
					<span>This life, this burning,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This fictive war that is over, this toy death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>These were the pictures of Phaëton.</span>
					<span>This is Phaëton.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He cast a final look down at the town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another at the fields still patched with snow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wind blew on his face. He moved away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out toward the crossroads, where the wagons pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when he got there, waited patiently</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under a windbreak of three twisted elms</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Half-hidden from the road.</span>
					<span>"Find her," he said.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"I guess we'll go back West then. Well, that's that."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wind burned at his flesh. He let it burn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Staring at a lost year.</span>
					<span>So he perceived</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A slow cart creaking up a slope of hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drawn by a horse as gaunt as poverty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And driven by a woman with great eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Edmund Ruffin, old Secessionist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Firer of the first gun that rang against Sumter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walks in his garden now, in the evening-cool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a red, barred flag slung stiffly over one arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a silver-butted pistol in his right hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He has just heard of Lee's surrender and Richmond's fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his face is marble over his high black stock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a moment he walks there, smelling the scents of Spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A gentleman taking his ease, while the sun sinks down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now it is well-nigh sunken. He smiles with the close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dry smile of age. It is time. He unfolds the flag,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cloaks it around his shoulders with neat, swift hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cocks the pistol and points it straight at his heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hammer falls, the dead man slumps to the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blood spurts out in the last light of the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Staining the red of the flag with more transient red.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>The gaunt man, Abraham Lincoln, woke one morning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a new dream that yet was an old dream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he had known it many times before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, usually, its coming prophesied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Important news of some sort, good or bad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though mostly good as he remembered it.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He had been standing on the shadowy deck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a black formless boat that moved away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a dim bank, into wide, gushing waters--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>River or sea, but huge--and as he stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The boat rushed into darkness like an arrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathering speed--and as it rushed, he woke.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He found it odd enough to tell about</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That day to various people, half in jest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And half in earnest--well, it passed the time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nearly everyone had some pet quirk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knocking on wood or never spilling salt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ladders or broken mirrors or a Friday,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so he thought he might be left his boat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Especially now, when he could breathe awhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Lee surrendered and the war stamped out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the long work of binding up the wounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not yet begun--although he had his plans</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For that long healing, and would work them out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In spite of all the bitter-hearted fools</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who only thought of punishing the South</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Now she was beaten.</span>
					<span>But this boat of his.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He thought he had it.</span>
					<span>"Johnston has surrendered.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It must be that, I guess--for that's about</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The only news we're waiting still to hear."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He smiled a little, spoke of other things.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That afternoon he drove beside his wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And talked with her about the days to come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With curious simplicity and peace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well, they were getting on, and when the end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came to his term, he would not be distressed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They would go back to Springfield, find a house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Live peaceably and simply, see old friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take a few cases every now and then.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old Billy Herndon's kept the practice up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I guess he'll sort of like to have me back.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We won't be skimped, we'll have enough to spend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enough to do--we'll have a quiet time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sort of Indian summer of our age.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He looked beyond the carriage, seeing it so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peace at the last, and rest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They drove back to the White House, dressed and ate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went to the theatre in their flag-draped box.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The play was a good play, he liked the play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laughed at the jokes, laughed at the funny man</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>With the long, weeping whiskers.</span>
					<span>The time passed.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shot rang out. The crazy murderer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaped from the box, mouthed out his Latin phrase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brandished his foolish pistol and was gone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lincoln lay stricken in the flag-draped box.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Living but speechless. Now they lifted him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bore him off. He lay some hours so.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the heart failed. The breath beat in the throat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The black, formless vessel carried him away.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Sally, waiting at Appleton</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On an autumn day of clear, bright sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Felt her heart and body begin to burn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As she hummed the lesson she had to learn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Yellow cornmeal and a jackass colt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a door that swings on a broken bolt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comfort the old and pity the wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And see your lover with open eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mend the broken and patch the frayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And carry the sorrow undismayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When your lover limps in the falling rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never quite to be whole again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clear the nettle and plant the corn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And keep your body a hunting-horn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Succor your love at fire and frost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When your lover remembers the blood he lost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And break your hands on the hard-moved wheel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till they are tougher than hands of steel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the new grass grows on the barren plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the house is built from the dust again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thrift and love for the house and the chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A scone on the hob for the son of grief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A knife in the ribs for the pleasant thief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the night and the river have memories . . ."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She stared at the future with equal eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet, in her glance, there was something still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not to be ground by Wingate will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or under the honor of Elspeth's name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dancing flicker that went and came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But did not falter for joy or grief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the years gone by with the blowing leaf.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>--French Dupré with his alien grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Always turning the buried ace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>French Dupré in his dancer's pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leading a reel with his stolen bride--</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She smiled a little and turned to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A weed-grown path and a scarlet tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Wingate coming there, painfully.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>John Brown's body lies a-mouldering in the grave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spread over it the bloodstained flag of his song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the sun to bleach, the wind and the birds to tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The snow to cover over with a pure fleece</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the New England cloud to work upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the grey absolution of its slow, most lilac-smelling rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until there is nothing there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ever knew a master or a slave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, brooding on the symbol of a wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Threw down the irons in the field of peace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>John Brown is dead, he will not come again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stray ghost-walker with a ghostly gun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the strong metal rust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the enclosing dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the consuming coal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That was the furious soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still like iron groans,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anointed with the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grow colder than the stones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the white roots of grass and little weeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suck the last hollow wildfire from the singing bones.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bury the South together with this man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bury the bygone South.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bury the minstrel with the honey-mouth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bury the broadsword virtues of the clan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bury the unmachined, the planters' pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The courtesy and the bitter arrogance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pistol-hearted horsemen who could ride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like jolly centaurs under the hot stars.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bury the whip, bury the branding-bars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bury the unjust thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That some tamed into mercy, being wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But could not starve the tiger from its eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or make it feed where beasts of mercy feed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bury the fiddle-music and the dance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sick magnolias of the false romance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the chivalry that went to seed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before its ripening.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And with these things, bury the purple dream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the America we have not been,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tropic empire, seeking the warm sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last foray of aristocracy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Based not on dollars or initiative</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or any blood for what that blood was worth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But on a certain code, a manner of birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A certain manner of knowing how to live,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pastoral rebellion of the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against machines, against the Age of Steam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Hamiltonian extremes against the Franklin mean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The genius of the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the metal hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great, slave-driven bark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full-oared upon the dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With gilded figurehead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fetters for the crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spices for the few,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The passion that is dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pomp we never knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bury this, too.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bury this destiny unmanifest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This system broken underneath the test,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside John Brown and though he knows his enemy is there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He is too full of sleep at last to care.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He was a stone, this man who lies so still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stone flung from a sling against a wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sacrificial instrument of kill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cold prayer hardened to a musket-ball:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet, he knew the uses of a hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he must have his justice, after all.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He was a lover of certain pastoral things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had the shepherd's gift.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he walked at peace, when he drank from the watersprings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyes would lift</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To see God, robed in a glory, but sometimes, too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Merely the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Untroubled by wrath or angels, vacant and blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vacant and high.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He knew not only doom but the shape of the land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reaping and sowing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He could take a lump of any earth in his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And feel the growing.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He was a farmer, he didn't think much of towns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wheels, the vastness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He liked the wide fields, the yellows, the lonely browns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The black ewe's fastness.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Out of his body grows revolving steel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of his body grows the spinning wheel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made up of wheels, the new, mechanic birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No longer bound by toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the unsparing soil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the old furrow-line,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great, metallic beast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Expanding West and East,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His heart a spinning coil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His juices burning oil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His body serpentine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of John Brown's strong sinews the tall skyscrapers grow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of his heart the chanting buildings rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rivet and girder, motor and dynamo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pillar of smoke by day and fire by night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The steel-faced cities reaching at the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The whole enormous and rotating cage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hung with hard jewels of electric light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smoky with sorrow, black with splendor, dyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whiter than damask for a crystal bride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With metal suns, the engine-handed Age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The genie we have raised to rule the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obsequious to our will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But servant-master still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tireless serf already half a god--</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Touch the familiar sod</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once, then gaze at the air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And see the portent there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With eyes for once washed clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of worship and of fear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is its hunger, there its living thirst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is the beating of the tremendous heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>You cannot read for omens.</span>
					<span>Stand apart</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the loud crowd and look upon the flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone and steadfast, without praise or blame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is the monster and the sleeping queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And both have roots struck deep in your own mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is reality that you have seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is reality that made you blind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So, when the crowd gives tongue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prophets, old or young,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bawl out their strange despair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or fall in worship there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let them applaud the image or condemn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But keep your distance and your soul from them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, if the heart within your breast must burst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a cracked crucible and pour its steel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White-hot before the white heat of the wheel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strive to recast once more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That attar of the ore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the strong mold of pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till it is whole again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And while the prophets shudder or adore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the flame, hoping it will give ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If you at last must have a word to say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say neither, in their way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"It is a deadly magic and accursed,"</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor "It is blest," but only "It is here."</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
