<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Invocation</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="invocation" epub:type="prologue z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Invocation</h2>
			<p>
				<span>American muse, whose strong and diverse heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many men have tried to understand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But only made it smaller with their art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because you are as various as your land,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As mountainous-deep, as flowered with blue rivers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thirsty with deserts, buried under snows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As native as the shape of Navajo quivers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And native, too, as the sea-voyaged rose.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Swift runner, never captured or subdued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven-branched elk beside the mountain stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That half a hundred hunters have pursued</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But never matched their bullets with the dream,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where the great huntsmen failed, I set my sorry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mortal snare for your immortal quarry.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>You are the buffalo-ghost, the broncho-ghost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With dollar-silver in your saddle-horn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cowboys riding in from Painted Post,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Indian arrow in the Indian corn,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And you are the clipped velvet of the lawns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Shropshire grows from Massachusetts sods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grey Maine rocks--and the war-painted dawns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That break above the Garden of the Gods.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The prairie-schooners crawling toward the ore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the cheap car, parked by the station-door.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where the skyscrapers lift their foggy plumes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of stranded smoke out of a stony mouth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You are that high stone and its arrogant fumes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you are ruined gardens in the South</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And bleak New England farms, so winter-white</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even their roofs look lonely, and the deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The middle grainland where the wind of night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is like all blind earth sighing in her sleep.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A friend, an enemy, a sacred hag</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With two tied oceans in her medicine-bag.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They tried to fit you with an English song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And clip your speech into the English tale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, even from the first, the words went wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The catbird pecked away the nightingale.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The homesick men begot high-cheekboned things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose wit was whittled with a different sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Thames and all the rivers of the kings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran into Mississippi and were drowned.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They planted England with a stubborn trust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the cleft dust was never English dust.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Stepchild of every exile from content</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the disavouched, hard-bitten pack</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shipped overseas to steal a continent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With neither shirts nor honor to their back.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Pimping grandee and rump-faced regicide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apple-cheeked younkers from a windmill-square,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Puritans stubborn as the nails of Pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rakes from Versailles and thieves from County Clare,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The black-robed priests who broke their hearts in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make you God and France or God and Spain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>These were your lovers in your buckskin-youth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And each one married with a dream so proud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He never knew it could not be the truth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that he coupled with a girl of cloud.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And now to see you is more difficult yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except as an immensity of wheel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made up of wheels, oiled with inhuman sweat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And glittering with the heat of ladled steel.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All these you are, and each is partly you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And none is false, and none is wholly true.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So how to see you as you really are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So how to suck the pure, distillate, stored</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Essence of essence from the hidden star</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make it pierce like a riposting sword.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For, as we hunt you down, you must escape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we pursue a shadow of our own</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That can be caught in a magician's cape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But has the flatness of a painted stone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Never the running stag, the gull at wing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pure elixir, the American thing.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And yet, at moments when the mind was hot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With something fierier than joy or grief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When each known spot was an eternal spot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every leaf was an immortal leaf,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I think that I have seen you, not as one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But clad in diverse semblances and powers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Always the same, as light falls from the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And always different, as the differing hours.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet, through each altered garment that you wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The naked body, shaking the heart's core.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All day the snow fell on that Eastern town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With its soft, pelting, little, endless sigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of infinite flakes that brought the tall sky down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till I could put my hands in the white sky</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And taste cold scraps of heaven on my tongue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And walk in such a changed and luminous light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As gods inhabit when the gods are young.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All day it fell. And when the gathered night</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Was a blue shadow cast by a pale glow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw you then, snow-image, bird of the snow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And I have seen and heard you in the dry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close-huddled furnace of the city street</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the parched moon was planted in the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the limp air hung dead against the heat.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I saw you rise, red as that rusty plant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dizzied with lights, half-mad with senseless sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enormous metal, shaking to the chant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a triphammer striking iron ground.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Enormous power, ugly to the fool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beautiful as a well-handled tool.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>These, and the memory of that windy day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the bare hills, beyond the last barbed wire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When all the orange poppies bloomed one way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if a breath would blow them into fire,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I keep forever, like the sea-lion's tusk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The broken sailor brings away to land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when he touches it, he smells the musk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the whole sea lies hollow in his hand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So, from a hundred visions, I make one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And out of darkness build my mocking sun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And should that task seem fruitless in the eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those a different magic sets apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see through the ice-crystal of the wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No nation but the nation that is Art,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Their words are just. But when the birchbark-call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is shaken with the sound that hunters make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The moose comes plunging through the forest-wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although the rifle waits beside the lake.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Art has no nations--but the mortal sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lingers like gold in immortality.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This flesh was seeded from no foreign grain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Pennsylvania and Kentucky wheat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it has soaked in California rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And five years tempered in New England sleet</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To strive at last, against an alien proof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by the changes of an alien moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To build again that blue, American roof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over a half-forgotten battle-tune</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And call unsurely, from a haunted ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Armies of shadows and the shadow-sound.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In your Long House there is an attic-place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full of dead epics and machines that rust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there, occasionally, with casual face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You come awhile to stir the sleepy dust;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Neither in pride not mercy, but in vast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Indifference at so many gifts unsought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The yellowed satins, smelling of the past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the loot the lucky pirates brought.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I only bring a cup of silver air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, in your casualness, receive it there.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Receive the dream too haughty for the breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Receive the words that should have walked as bold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the storm walks along the mountain-crest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And are like beggars whining in the cold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The maimed presumption, the unskilful skill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The patchwork colors, fading from the first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the fire that fretted at the will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With such a barren ecstasy of thirst.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Receive them all--and should you choose to touch them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With one slant ray of quick, American light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even the dust will have no power to smutch them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even the worst will glitter in the night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If not--the dry bones littered by the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May still point giants toward their golden prey.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
