<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Prelude</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="prelude" epub:type="prologue z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Prelude</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">The Slaver</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>He closed the Bible carefully, putting it down</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>As if his fingers loved it.</span>
					<span>Then he turned.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl3">
					<span>"Mr. Mate."</span>
					<span>"Yes, sir."</span>
					<span>The captain's eyes held a shadow.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"I think, while this weather lasts," he said, after a pause,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"We'd better get them on deck as much as we can.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They keep better that way. Besides," he added, unsmiling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"She's begun to stink already. You've noticed it?"</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The mate nodded, a boyish nod of half-apology,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>"And only a week out, too, sir."</span>
					<span>"Yes," said the skipper.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyes looked into themselves. "Well. The trade," he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"The trade's no damn perfume-shop." He drummed with his fingers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Seem to be quiet to-night," he murmured at last.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Oh yes sir, quiet enough." The mate flushed. "Not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What you'd call quiet at home but--quiet enough."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"Um," said the skipper. "What about the big fellow?"</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"Tarbarrel, sir? The man who says he's a king?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was praying to something--it made the others restless.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Mr. Olsen stopped it."</span>
					<span>"I don't like that," said the skipper.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl3">
					<span>"It was only an idol, sir."</span>
					<span>"Oh."</span>
					<span>"A stone or something."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>"Oh."</span>
					<span>"But he's a bad one, sir--a regular sullen one--</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He--eyes in the dark--like a cat's--enough to give you--"</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mate was young. He shivered. "The creeps," he said.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"We've had that kind," said the skipper. His mouth was hard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then it relaxed. "Damn cheating Arabe!" he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"I told them I'd take no more of their pennyweight kings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worth pounds to look at, and then when you get them aboard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go crazy so they have to be knocked on the head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or else just eat up their hearts and die in a week</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taking up room for nothing."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The mate hardly heard him, thinking of something else.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"I'm afraid we'll lose some more of the women," he said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Well, they're a scratch lot," said the skipper, "Any sickness?"</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl3">
					<span>"Just the usual, sir."</span>
					<span>"But nothing like plague or--"</span>
					<span>"No sir."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"The Lord is merciful," said the skipper.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His voice was wholly sincere--an old ship's bell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hung in the steeple of a meeting-house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all New England and the sea's noise in it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Well, you'd better take another look-see, Mr. Mate."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mate felt his lips go dry. "Aye aye, sir," he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wetting his lips with his tongue. As he left the cabin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He heard the Bible being opened again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lantern in hand, he went down to the hold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each time he went he had a trick of trying</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shut the pores of his body against the stench</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By force of will, by thinking of salt and flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But it was always useless.</span>
					<span>He kept thinking:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I get home, when I get a bath and clean food,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I've gone swimming out beyond the Point</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that cold green, so cold it must be pure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond the purity of a dissolved star,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I get my shore-clothes on, and one of those shirts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the linen-closet that smells of lavender,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will my skin smell black even then, will my skin smell black?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The lantern shook in his hand.</span>
					<span>This was black, here,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This was black to see and feel and smell and taste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blackness of black, with one weak lamp to light it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As ineffectually as a firefly in Hell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And, being so, should be silent.</span>
					<span>But the hold</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Was never silent.</span>
					<span>There was always that breathing.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Always that thick breathing, always those shivering cries.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A few of the slaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knew English--at least the English for water and Jesus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>"I'm dying." "Sick." "My name Caesar."</span>
					<span>Those who knew</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These things, said these things now when they saw the lantern</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mechanically, as tamed beasts answer the whipcrack.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their voices beat at the light like heavy moths.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But most made merely liquid or guttural sounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meaningless to the mate, but horribly like</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sounds of palateless men or animals trying</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>To talk through a human throat.</span>
					<span>The mate was used</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the confusion of limbs and bodies by now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At first it had made him think of the perturbed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blind coil of blacksnakes thawing on a rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the bleak sun of Spring, or Judgment Day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just after the first sounding of the trump</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When all earth seethes and crumbles with the slow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vast, mouldy resurrection of the dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But he had passed such fancies.</span>
					<span>He must see</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As much as he could. He couldn't see very much.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were too tightly packed but--no plague yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the chains were fast. Then he saw something.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The woman was asleep but her baby was dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wondered whether to take it from her now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, it would only rouse the others. Tomorrow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He turned away with a shiver.</span>
					<span>His glance fell</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the man who said he had been a king, the man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called Tarbarrel, the image of black stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Whose eyes were savage gods.</span>
					<span>The huge suave muscles</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rippled like stretching cats as he changed posture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Magnificence in chains that yet was ease.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The smolder in those eyes. The steady hate.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The mate made himself stare till the eyes dropped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then he turned back to the companionway.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His forehead was hot and sweaty. He wiped it off,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But then the rough cloth of his sleeve smelt black.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The captain shut the Bible as he came in.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl3">
					<span>"Well, Mister Mate?"</span>
					<span>"All quiet, sir."</span>
					<span>The captain</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked at him sharply. "Sit down," he said in a bark.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mate's knees gave as he sat. "It's--hot down there,"</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said, a little weakly, wanting to wipe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His face again, but knowing he'd smell that blackness</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Again, if he did.</span>
					<span>"Takes you that way, sometimes,"</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said the captain, not unkindly, "I remember</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Back in the twenties."</span>
					<span>Something hot and strong</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Bit the mate's throat. He coughed.</span>
					<span>"There," said the captain.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Putting the cup down. "You'll feel better now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You're young for this trade, Mister, and that's a fact."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The mate coughed and didn't answer, much too glad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see the captain change back to himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From something made of steam, to want to talk.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, after a while, he heard the captain talking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Half to himself.</span>
					<span>"It's a fact, that," he was saying,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"They've even made a song of me--ever heard it?"</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mate shook his head, quickly, "Oh yes you have.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You know how it goes." He cleared his throat and hummed:</span>
			</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
				<p>
					<span>"Captain Ball was a Yankee slaver,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blow, blow, blow the man down!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He traded in niggers and loved his Saviour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give me some time to blow the man down."</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span>The droning chanty filled the narrow cabin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An instant with grey Massachusetts sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wave of the North, wave of the melted ice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hard salt-sparkles on the harder rock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The stony islands.</span>
					<span>Then it died away.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"Well," said the captain, "if that's how it strikes them--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They mean it bad but I don't take it bad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I get my sailing-orders from the Lord."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He touched the Bible. "And it's down there, Mister,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down there in black and white--the sons of Ham--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bondservants--sweat of their brows." His voice trailed off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into texts. "I tell you, Mister," he said fiercely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"The pay's good pay, but it's the Lord's work, too.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We're spreading the Lord's seed--spreading his seed--"</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His hand made the outflung motion of a sower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the mate, staring, seemed to hear the slight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patter of fallen seeds on fertile ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Black, shining seeds, robbed from a black king's storehouse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Falling and falling on American earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With light, inexorable patter and fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>To strike, lie silent, quicken.</span>
					<span>Till the Spring</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came with its weeping rains, and the ground bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A blade, a shadow-sapling, a tree of shadow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A black-leaved tree whose trunk and roots were shadow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tree shaped like a yoke, growing and growing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until it blotted all the seamen's stars.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Horses of anger trampling, horses of anger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trampling behind the sky in ominous cadence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beat of the heavy hooves like metal on metal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Trampling something down. . . .</span>
					<span>Was it they, was it they?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or was it cold wind in the leaves of the shadow-tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That made such grievous music?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i8">Oh Lordy Je-sus</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">Won't you come and find me?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">They put me in jail, Lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">Way down in the jail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">Won't you send me a pro-phet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">Just one of your prophets</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">Like Moses and Aaron</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">To get me some bail?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i8">I'm feeling poorly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">Yes, mighty poorly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">I ain't got no strength, Lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">I'm all trampled down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">So send me an angel</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">Just any old angel</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">To give me a robe, Lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">And give me a crown.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i8">Oh Lordy Je-sus</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">It's a long time comin'</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">It's a long time co-o-min'</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">That Jubilee time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">We'll wait and we'll pray, Lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">We'll wait and we'll pray, Lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">But it's a long time, Lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">Yes, it's a long time.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The dark sobbing ebbed away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The captain was still talking. "Yes," he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"And yet we treat 'em well enough. There's no one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Salem to the Guinea Coast can say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>They lose as few as I do." He stopped.</span>
					<span>"Well, Mister?"</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The mate arose. "Good night sir and--"</span>
					<span>"Goodnight"</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The mate went up on deck. The breeze was fresh.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There were the stars, steady. He shook himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a dog coming out of water and felt better.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Six weeks, with luck, and they'd be back in port</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he could draw his pay and see his girl.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meanwhile, it wasn't his watch, so he could sleep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The captain still below, reading that Bible. . . .</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forget it--and the noises, still half-heard--</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He'd have to go below to sleep, this time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But after, if the weather held like this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He'd have them sling a hammock up on deck.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You couldn't smell the black so much on deck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so you didn't dream it when you slept.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
